# 13 CONSERVATION, ECOLOGY, AND GROWTH [20-chap13.html#page301]

## LIBERAL COMPLAINTS [liberal-complaints]

Left-liberal intellectuals are often a wondrous group to behold. In the
last three or four decades, not a very long time in human history, they
have, like whirling dervishes, let loose a series of angry complaints
against free-market capitalism. The curious thing is that each of these
complaints has been contradictory to one or more of their predecessors.
But contradictory complaints by liberal intellectuals do not seem to
faze them or serve to abate their petulance—even though it is often the
very same intellectuals who are reversing themselves so rapidly. And
these reversals seem to make no dent whatever in their
self-righteousness or in the self-confidence of their position.

Let us consider the record of recent decades:

1\. In the late 1930s and early 1940s, the liberal intellectuals came to
the conclusion that capitalism was suffering from inevitable “secular
stagnation,” a stagnation imposed by the slowing down of population
growth, the end of the old Western frontier, and by the supposed fact
that no further inventions were possible. All this spelled eternal
stagnation, permanent mass unemployment, and therefore the need for
socialism, or thoroughgoing State planning, to replace free-market
capitalism. This on the threshold of the greatest boom in American
history!

2\. During the 1950s, despite the great boom in postwar America, the
liberal intellectuals kept raising their sights; the cult of “economic
growth” now entered the scene. To be sure, capitalism was growing, but
it was not growing fast enough. Therefore free-market capitalism must be
abandoned, and socialism or government intervention must step in and
force-feed the economy, must build investments and compel greater saving
in order to maximize the rate of growth, even if we don’t *want* to grow
that fast. Conservative economists such as Colin Clark attacked this
liberal program as “growthmanship.”

3\. Suddenly, John Kenneth Galbraith entered the liberal scene with his
best-selling *The Affluent Society* in 1958. And just as suddenly, the
liberal intellectuals reversed their indictments. The trouble with
capitalism, it now appeared, was that it had grown *too much*; we were
no longer stagnant, but *too well off*, and man had lost his
spirituality amidst supermarkets and automobile tail fins. What was
necessary, then, was for government to step in, either in massive
intervention or as socialism, and tax the consumers heavily in order to
reduce their bloated affluence.

4\. The cult of excess affluence had its day, to be superseded by a
contradictory worry about poverty, stimulated by Michael Harrington’s
*The Other America* in 1962. Suddenly, the problem with America was not
excessive affluence, but increasing and grinding poverty—and, once
again, the solution was for the government to step in, plan mightily,
and tax the wealthy in order to lift up the poor. And so we had the War
on Poverty for several years.

5\. Stagnation; deficient growth; overaffluence; overpoverty; the
intellectual fashions changed like ladies’ hemlines. Then, in 1964, the
happily short-lived Ad Hoc Committee on the Triple Revolution issued its
then-famous manifesto, which brought us and the liberal intellectuals
full circle. For two or three frenetic years we were regaled with the
idea that America’s problem was not stagnation but the exact reverse: in
a few short years all of America’s production facilities would be
automated and cybernated, incomes and production would be enormous and
superabundant, *but* everyone would be automated out of a job. Once
again, free-market capitalism would lead to permanent mass unemployment,
which could *only* be remedied—you guessed it!—by massive State
intervention or by outright socialism. For several years, in the
mid-1960s, we thus suffered from what was justly named the “Automation
Hysteria.”^[1](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn1)^

6\. By the late 1960s it was clear to everyone that the automation
hysterics had been dead wrong, that automation was proceeding at no
faster a pace than old-fashioned “mechanization” and indeed that the
1969 recession was causing a falling off in the rate of increase of
productivity. One hears no more about automation dangers nowadays; we
are now in the seventh phase of liberal economic flip-flops.

7\. Affluence is again excessive, and, in the name of conservation,
ecology, and the increasing scarcity of resources, free-market
capitalism is growing much too fast. State planning, or socialism, must,
of course, step in to abolish all growth and bring about a zero-growth
society and economy—in order to avoid negative growth, or retrogression,
sometime in the future! We are now back to a super-Galbraithian
position, to which has been added scientific jargon about effluents,
ecology, and “spaceship earth,” as well as a bitter assault on
technology itself as being an evil polluter. Capitalism has brought
about technology, growth—including population growth, industry, and
pollution—and government is supposed to step in and eradicate these
evils.

It is not at all unusual, in fact, to find the same people now holding a
contradictory blend of positions 5 and 7 and maintaining *at one and the
same time* that (a) we are living in a “post-scarcity” age where we no
longer need private property, capitalism, or material incentives to
production; *and* (b) that capitalist greed is depleting our resources
and bringing about imminent worldwide scarcity. The liberal answer to
both, or indeed to all, of these problems turns out, of course, to be
the same: socialism or state planning to replace free-market capitalism.
The great economist Joseph Schumpeter put the whole shoddy performance
of liberal intellectuals into a nutshell a generation ago:

> Capitalism stands its trial before judges who have the sentence of
> death in their pockets. They are going to pass it, whatever the
> defense they may hear; the only success victorious defense can
> possibly produce is a change in the
> indictment.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn2)^

And so, the charges, the indictments, may change and contradict previous
charges—but the answer is always and wearily the same.

## THE ATTACK ON TECHNOLOGY AND GROWTH [the-attack-on-technology-and-growth]

The fashionable attack on growth and affluence is palpably an attack by
comfortable, contented upper-class liberals. Enjoying a material
contentment and a living standard undreamt of by even the wealthiest men
of the past, it is easy for upper-class liberals to sneer at
“materialism,” and to call for a freeze on all further economic
advance.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn3)^ For the mass of the world’s
population still living in squalor such a cry for the cessation of
growth is truly obscene; but even in the United States, there is little
evidence of satiety and superabundance. Even the upper-class liberals
themselves have not been conspicuous for making a bonfire of their
salary checks as a contribution to their war on “materialism” and
affluence.

The widespread attack on technology is even more irresponsible. If
technology were to be rolled back to the “tribe” and to the
preindustrial era, the result would be mass starvation and death on a
universal scale. The vast majority of the world’s population is
dependent for its very survival on modern technology and industry. The
North American continent was able to accommodate approximately one
million Indians in the days before Columbus, all living on a subsistence
level. It is now able to accommodate several hundred million people, all
living at an infinitely higher living standard—and the reason is modern
technology and industry. Abolish the latter and we will abolish the
people as well. For all one knows, to our fanatical antipopulationists
this “solution” to the population question may be a good thing, but for
the great majority of us, this would be a draconian “final solution”
indeed.

The irresponsible attack on technology is another liberal flip-flop: it
comes from the same liberal intellectuals who, 30-odd years ago, were
denouncing capitalism for not putting modern technology to full use in
the service of State planning and were calling for absolute rule by a
modern “technocratic” elite. Yet now the very same intellectuals who not
so long ago were yearning for a technocratic dictatorship over all of
our lives are now trying to deprive us of the vital fruits of technology
itself.

Yet the various contradictory phases of liberal thought never completely
die; and many of the same antitechnologists, in a 180-degree reversal of
the automation hysteria, are *also* confidently forecasting
technological stagnation from now on. They cheerily predict a gloomy
future for mankind by assuming that technology will stagnate, and not
continue to improve and accelerate. This is the technique of
pseudoscientific forecasting of the widely touted antigrowth Club of
Rome Report. As Passell, Roberts, and Ross write in their critique of
the report, “If the telephone company were restricted to
turn-of-the-century technology 20 million operators would be needed to
handle today’s volume of calls.” Or, as British editor Norman Macrae has
observed, “an extrapolation of the trends of the 1880s would show
today’s cities buried under horse
manure.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn4)^ Or, further:

> While the team’s \[Club of Rome’s\] model hypothesizes exponential
> growth for industrial and agricultural needs, it places arbitrary,
> nonexponential, limits on the technical progress that might
> accommodate these needs. ...
>
> The Rev. Thomas Malthus made a similar point two centuries ago without
> benefit of computer printouts. ... Malthus argued that people tend to
> multiply exponentially, while the food supply at best increases at a
> constant rate. He expected that starvation and war would periodically
> redress the balance. ...
>
> But there is no particular criterion beyond myopia on which to base
> that speculation. Malthus was wrong; food capacity has kept up with
> population. While no one knows for certain, technical progress shows
> no sign of slowing down. The best econometric estimates suggest that
> it is indeed growing exponentially.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn5)^

What we need is more economic growth, not less; more and better
technology, and not the impossible and absurd attempt to scrap
technology and return to the primitive tribe. Improved technology and
greater capital investment will lead to higher living standards for all
and provide greater material comforts, as well as the leisure to pursue
and enjoy the “spiritual” side of life. There is precious little culture
or civilization available for people who must work long hours to eke out
a subsistence living. The real problem is that productive capital
investment is being siphoned off by taxes, restrictions, and government
contracts for unproductive and wasteful government expenditures,
including military and space boondoggling. Furthermore, the precious
technical resource of scientists and engineers is being ever more
intensively diverted to government, instead of to “civilian” consumer
production. What we need is for government to get out of the way, remove
its incubus of taxation and expenditures from the economy, and allow
productive and technical resources once again to devote themselves fully
to increasing the well-being of the mass of consumers. We need growth,
higher living standards, and a technology and capital equipment that
meet consumer wants and demands; but we can only achieve these by
removing the incubus of statism and allowing the energies of all of the
population to express themselves in the free-market economy. We need an
economic and technological growth that emerges freely, as Jane Jacobs
has shown, from the free-market economy, and not the distortions and
wastes imposed upon the world economy from the liberal force-feeding of
the 1950s. We need, in short, a truly free-market, libertarian economy.

## CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES [conservation-of-resources]

As we have mentioned, the selfsame liberals who claim that we have
entered the “postscarcity” age and are in no further need of economic
growth, are in the forefront of the complaint that “capitalist greed” is
destroying our scarce natural resources. The gloom-and-doom soothsayers
of the Club of Rome, for example, by simply extrapolating current trends
of resource use, confidently predict the exhaustion of vital raw
materials within 40 years. But confident—and completely
faulty—predictions of exhaustion of raw materials have been made
countless times in recent centuries.

What the soothsayers have overlooked is the vital role that the
free-market economic mechanism plays in conserving, and adding to,
natural resources. Let us consider, for example, a typical copper mine.
Why has copper ore not been exhausted long before now by the inexorable
demands of our industrial civilization? Why is it that copper miners,
once they have found and opened a vein of ore, do not mine all the
copper immediately; why, instead, do they conserve the copper mine, add
to it, and extract the copper gradually, from year to year? Because the
mine owners realize that, for example, if they triple *this year’s*
production of copper they may indeed triple this year’s income, *but*
they will also be depleting the mine, and therefore the *future* income
they will be able to derive from it. On the market, this loss of future
income is immediately reflected in the monetary value—the price—of the
mine as a whole. This monetary value, reflected in the selling price of
the mine, and then of individual shares of mining stock, is based on the
expected future income to be earned from the production of the copper;
any depletion of the mine, then, will lower the value of the mine and
hence the price of the mining stock. Every mine owner, then, has to
weigh the advantages of immediate income from copper production against
the loss in the “capital value” of the mine as a whole, and hence
against the loss in the value of his shares.

The mine owners’ decisions are determined by their expectations of
future copper yields and demands, the existing and expected rates of
interest, etc. Suppose, for example, that copper is expected to be
rendered obsolete in a few years by a new synthetic metal. In that case,
copper mine owners will rush to produce more copper now when it is more
highly valued, and save less for the future when it will have little
value—thereby benefitting the consumers and the economy as a whole by
producing copper now when it is more intensely needed. But, on the other
hand, if a copper shortage is expected in the future, mine owners will
produce less now and wait to produce more later when copper prices are
higher—thereby benefitting society by producing more in the future when
it will be needed more intensely. Thus, we see that the market economy
contains a marvelous built-in mechanism whereby the decisions of
resource owners on present as against future production will benefit not
only their own income and wealth, but the mass of consumers and the
economy as a whole.

But there is much more to this free-market mechanism: Suppose that a
growing shortage of copper is now expected in the future. The result is
that more copper will be withheld now and saved for future production.
The price of copper now will rise. The increase in copper prices will
have several “conserving” effects. In the first place, the higher price
of copper is a signal to the users of copper that it is scarcer and more
expensive; the copper users will then conserve the use of this more
expensive metal. They will use less copper, substituting cheaper metals
or plastics; and copper will be conserved more fully and saved for those
uses for which there is no satisfactory substitute. Moreover, the
greater cost of copper will stimulate (a) a rush to find new copper
ores; and (b) a search for less expensive substitutes, perhaps by new
technological discoveries. Higher prices for copper will also stimulate
campaigns for saving and recycling the metal. This price mechanism of
the free market is precisely the reason that copper, and other natural
resources, have not disappeared long ago. As Passell, Roberts, and Ross
say in their critique of the Club of Rome:

> Natural resource reserves and needs in the model are calculated
> \[in\]... the absence of prices as a variable in the “Limits”
> projection of how resources will be used. In the real world, rising
> prices act as an economic signal to conserve scarce resources,
> providing incentives to use cheaper materials in their place,
> stimulating research efforts on new ways to save on resource inputs,
> and making renewed exploration attempts more
> profitable.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn6)^

In fact, in contrast to the gloom-and-doomers, raw material and natural
resource prices have remained low, and have generally declined relative
to other prices. To liberal and Marxist intellectuals, this is usually a
sign of capitalist “exploitation” of the underdeveloped countries which
are often the producers of the raw materials. But it is a sign of
something completely different, of the fact that natural resources have
not been growing scarcer but more abundant; hence their relatively lower
cost. The development of cheap substitutes, e.g., plastics, synthetic
fibres, has kept natural resources cheap and abundant. And in a few
decades we can expect that modern technology will develop a remarkably
cheap source of energy—nuclear fusion—a development which will
automatically yield a great abundance of raw materials for the work that
will be needed.

The development of synthetic materials and of cheaper energy highlights
a vital aspect of modern technology the doom-sayers overlook: that
technology and industrial production *create* resources which had never
existed as effective resources. For example, before the development of
the kerosene lamp and especially the automobile, petroleum was not a
resource but an unwanted waste, a giant liquid black “weed.” It was only
the development of modern industry that converted petroleum *into* a
useful resource. Furthermore, modern technology, through improved
geological techniques and through the incentives of the market, has been
*finding* new petroleum reserves at a rapid rate.

Predictions of imminent exhaustion of resources, as we have noted, are
nothing new. In 1908, President Theodore Roosevelt, calling a Governors’
Conference on natural resources, warned of their “imminent exhaustion.”
At the same conference, steel industrialist Andrew Carnegie predicted
the exhaustion of the Lake Superior iron range by 1940, while railroad
magnate James J. Hill forecast the exhaustion of much of our timber
resources in ten years. Not only that: Hill even predicted an imminent
shortage of wheat production in the United States, in a country where we
are still grappling with the wheat *surpluses* generated by our farm
subsidy program. Current forecasts of doom are made on the same basis: a
grievous underweighting of the prospects of modern technology and an
ignorance of the workings of the market
economy.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn7)^

It is true that several particular natural resources have suffered, in
the past and now, from depletion. But in each case the reason has not
been “capitalist greed”; on the contrary, the reason has been the
*failure* of government to allow private property in the resource—in
short, a failure to pursue the logic of private property rights far
enough.

One example has been timber resources. In the American West and in
Canada, most of the forests are owned, not by private owners but by the
federal (or provincial) government. The government then *leases* their
use to private timber companies. In short, private property is permitted
only in the annual *use* of the resource, but not in the forest, the
resource, itself. In this situation, the private timber company does not
own the capital value, and therefore does not have to worry about
depletion of the resource itself. The timber company has no economic
incentive to conserve the resource, replant trees, etc. Its only
incentive is to cut as many trees as quickly as possible, since there is
no economic value to the timber company in maintaining the capital value
of the forest. In Europe, where private ownership of forests is far more
common, there is little complaint of destruction of timber resources.
For wherever private property is allowed in the forest itself, it is to
the benefit of the owner to preserve and restore tree growth while he is
cutting timber, so as to avoid depletion of the forest’s capital
value.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn8)^

Thus, in the United States, a major culprit has been the Forest Service
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which owns forests and leases
annual rights to cut timber, with resulting devastation of the trees. In
contrast, private forests such as those owned by large lumber firms like
Georgia-Pacific and U.S. Plywood scientifically cut and reforest their
trees in order to maintain their future
supply.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn9)^

Another unhappy consequence of the American government’s failure to
allow private property in a resource was the destruction of the Western
grasslands in the late nineteenth century. Every viewer of “Western”
movies is familiar with the mystique of the “open range” and the often
violent “wars” among cattlemen, sheepmen, and farmers over parcels of
ranch land. The “open range” was the failure of the federal government
to apply the policy of homesteading to the changed conditions of the
drier climate west of the Mississippi. In the East, the 160 acres
granted free to homesteading farmers on government land constituted a
viable technological unit for farming in a wetter climate. But in the
dry climate of the West, no successful cattle or sheep ranch could be
organized on a mere 160 acres. But the federal government refused to
expand the 160-acre unit to allow the “home-steading” of larger cattle
ranches. Hence, the “open range,” on which private cattle and sheep
owners were able to roam unchecked on government-owned pasture land. But
this meant that no one owned the pasture, the land itself; it was
therefore to the economic advantage of every cattle or sheep owner to
graze the land and use up the grass as quickly as possible, otherwise
the grass would be grazed by some other sheep or cattle owner. The
result of this tragically shortsighted refusal to allow private property
in grazing land itself was an overgrazing of the land, the ruining of
the grassland by grazing too early in the season, and the failure of
anyone to restore or replant the grass—anyone who bothered to restore
the grass would have had to look on helplessly while someone else grazed
his cattle or sheep. Hence the overgrazing of the West, and the onset of
the “dust bowl.” Hence also the illegal attempts by numerous cattlemen,
farmers, and sheepmen to take the law into their own hands and fence off
the land into private property—and the range wars that often followed.

Professor Samuel P. Hays, in his authoritative account of the
conservation movement in America, writes of the range problem:

> Much of the Western livestock industry depended for its forage upon
> the “open” range, owned by the federal government, but free for anyone
> to use. ... Congress had never provided legislation regulating grazing
> or permitting stockmen to acquire range lands. Cattle and sheepmen
> roamed the public domain. ... Cattlemen fenced range for their
> exclusive use, but competitors cut the wire. Resorting to force and
> violence, sheepherders and cowboys “solved” their disputes over
> grazing lands by slaughtering rival livestock and murdering rival
> stockmen. ... Absence of the most elementary institutions of property
> law created confusion, bitterness, and destruction.
>
> Amid this turmoil the public range rapidly deteriorated. Originally
> plentiful and lush, the forage supply was subjected to intense
> pressure by increasing use. ... The public domain became stocked with
> more animals than the range could support. Since each stockman feared
> that others would beat him to the available forage, he grazed early in
> the year and did not permit the young grass to mature and reseed.
> Under such conditions the quality and quantity of available forage
> rapidly decreased; vigorous perennials gave way to annuals and annuals
> to weeds.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn10)^

Hays concludes that public-domain range lands may have been depleted by
over two-thirds by this process, as compared to their virgin condition.

There is a vitally important area in which the absence of private
property in the resource has been and is causing, not only depletion of
resources, but also a complete failure to develop vast potential
resources. This is the potentially enormously productive *ocean*
resource. The oceans are in the international public domain, i.e., no
person, company, or even national government is allowed property rights
in parts of the ocean. As a result, the oceans have remained in the same
primitive state as was the land in the precivilized days before the
development of agriculture. The way of production for primitive man was
“hunting-and-gathering”: the hunting of wild animals and the gathering
of fruits, berries, nuts, and wild seeds and vegetables. Primitive man
worked passively *within* his environment instead of acting to transform
it; hence he just lived off the land without attempting to remould it.
As a result, the land was unproductive, and only a relatively few
tribesmen could exist at a bare subsistence level. It was only with the
development of agriculture, the farming of the soil, and the
transformation of the land through farming that productivity and living
standards could take giant leaps forward. And it was only with
agriculture that civilization could begin. But to permit the development
of agriculture there had to be private property rights, first in the
fields and crops, and then in the land itself.

With respect to the ocean, however, we are still in the primitive,
unproductive hunting and gathering stage. Anyone can capture fish in the
ocean, or extract its resources, but only on the run, only as hunters
and gatherers. No one can *farm* the ocean, no one can engage in
*aquaculture*. In this way we are deprived of the use of the immense
fish and mineral resources of the seas. For example, if anyone tried to
farm the sea and to increase the productivity of the fisheries by
fertilizers, he would immediately be deprived of the fruits of his
efforts because he could not keep other fishermen from rushing in and
seizing the fish. And so no one tries to fertilize the oceans as the
land is fertilized. Furthermore, there is no economic incentive—in fact,
there is every *dis*incentive—for anyone to engage in technological
research in the ways and means of improving the productivity of the
fisheries, or in extracting the mineral resources of the oceans. There
will only be such incentive when property rights in parts of the ocean
are as fully allowed as property rights in the land. Even now there is a
simple but effective technique that could be used for increasing fish
productivity: parts of the ocean could be fenced off electronically, and
through this readily available electronic fencing, fish could be
segregated by size. By preventing big fish from eating smaller fish, the
production of fish could be increased enormously. And if private
property in parts of the ocean were permitted, a vast flowering of
*aquaculture* would create and multiply ocean resources in numerous ways
we cannot now even foresee.

National governments have tried vainly to cope with the problem of fish
depletion by placing irrational and uneconomic restrictions on the total
size of the catch, or on the length of the allowable season. In the
cases of salmon, tuna, and halibut, technological methods of fishing
have thereby been kept primitive and unproductive by unduly shortening
the season and injuring the quality of the catch and by stimulating
overproduction—and underuse during the year—of the fishing fleets. And
of course such governmental restrictions do nothing at all to stimulate
the growth of aquaculture. As Professors North and Miller write:

> Fishermen are poor because they are forced to use inefficient
> equipment and to fish only a small fraction of the time \[by the
> governmental regulations\] and of course there are far too many of
> them. The consumer pays a much higher price for red salmon than would
> be necessary if efficient methods were used. Despite the ever-growing
> intertwining bonds of regulations, the preservation of the salmon run
> is still not assured.
>
> The root of the problem lies in the current non-ownership arrangement.
> It is not in the interests of any individual fisherman to concern
> himself with perpetuation of the salmon run. Quite the contrary: It is
> rather in his interests to catch as many fish as he can during the
> season.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn11)^

In contrast, North and Miller point out that private property rights in
the ocean, under which the owner would use the least costly and most
efficient technology *and* preserve and make productive the resource
itself, is now more feasible than ever: “The invention of modern
electronic sensing equipment has now made the policing of large bodies
of water relatively cheap and easy.”^[12](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn12)^

The growing international conflicts over parts of the ocean only further
highlight the importance of private property rights in this vital area.
For as the United States and other nations assert their sovereignty 200
miles from their shores, and as private companies and governments
squabble over areas of the ocean; and as trawlers, fishing nets, oil
drillers, and mineral diggers war over the same areas of the
ocean—property rights become increasingly and patently more important.
As Francis Christy writes:

> coal is mined in shafts below the sea floor, oil is drilled from
> platforms fixed to the bottom rising above the water, minerals can be
> dredged from the surface of the ocean bed... sedentary animals are
> scraped from the bed on which telephone cables may lie, bottom feeding
> animals are caught in traps or trawls, mid-water species may be taken
> by hook and line or by trawls which occasionally interfere with
> submarines, surface species are taken by net and harpoon, and the
> surface itself is used for shipping as well as the vessels engaged in
> extracting resources.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn13)^

This growing conflict leads Christy to predict that “the seas are in a
stage of transition. They are moving from a condition in which property
rights are almost nonexistent to a condition in which property rights of
some form will become appropriated or made available.” Eventually,
concludes Christy, “as the sea’s resources become more valuable,
exclusive rights will be acquired.”^[14](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn14)^

## POLLUTION [pollution]

All right: Even if we concede that full private property in resources
and the free market will conserve and create resources, and do it far
better than government regulation, what of the problem of pollution?
Wouldn’t we be suffering aggravated pollution from unchecked “capitalist
greed”?

There is, first of all, this stark empirical fact: Government ownership,
even socialism, has proved to be no solution to the problem of
pollution. Even the most starry-eyed proponents of government planning
concede that the poisoning of Lake Baikal in the Soviet Union is a
monument to heedless industrial pollution of a valuable natural
resource. But there is far more to the problem than that. Note, for
example, the two crucial areas in which pollution has become an
important problem: the air and the waterways, particularly the rivers.
But these are precisely two of the vital areas in society in which
private property has not been permitted to function.

First, the rivers. The rivers, and the oceans too, are generally owned
by the government; private property, certainly complete private
property, has not been permitted in the water. In essence, then,
government owns the rivers. But government ownership is not true
ownership, because the government officials, while able to control the
resource cannot themselves reap their capital value on the market.
Government officials cannot sell the rivers or sell stock in them.
Hence, they have no economic incentive to preserve the purity and value
of the rivers. Rivers are, then, in the economic sense, “unowned”;
therefore government officials have permitted their corruption and
pollution. Anyone has been able to dump polluting garbage and wastes in
the waters. But consider what would happen if private firms were able to
own the rivers and the lakes. If a private firm owned Lake Erie, for
example, then anyone dumping garbage in the lake would be promptly sued
in the courts for their aggression against private property and would be
forced by the courts to pay damages and to cease and desist from any
further aggression. Thus, only private property rights will insure an
end to pollution—invasion of resources. Only because the rivers are
unowned is there no owner to rise up and defend his precious resource
from attack. If, in contrast, anyone should dump garbage or pollutants
into a lake which is privately owned (as are many smaller lakes), he
would not be permitted to do so for very long—the owner would come
roaring to its defense.^[15](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn15)^ Professor
Dolan writes:

> With a General Motors owning the Mississippi River, you can be sure
> that stiff effluent charges would be assessed on industries and
> municipalities along its banks, and that the water would be kept clean
> enough to maximize revenues from leases granted to firms seeking
> rights to drinking water, recreation, and commercial
> fishing.^[16](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn16)^

If government as owner has allowed the pollution of the rivers,
government has also been the single major active polluter, especially in
its role as municipal sewage disposer. There already exist low-cost
chemical toilets which can burn off sewage without polluting air,
ground, or water; but who will invest in chemical toilets when local
governments will dispose of sewage free to their customers?

This example points up a problem similar to the case of the stunting of
aquaculture technology by the absence of private property: if
governments as owners of the rivers permit pollution of water, then
industrial technology will—and has—become a water-polluting technology.
If production processes are allowed to pollute the rivers unchecked by
their owners, then that is the sort of production technology we will
have.

If the problem of water pollution can be cured by private property
rights in water, how about air pollution? How can libertarians possibly
come up with a solution for this grievous problem? Surely, there can’t
be private property in the *air*? But the answer is: yes, there can. We
have already seen how radio and TV frequencies can be privately owned.
So could channels for airlines. Commercial airline routes, for example,
could be privately owned; there is no need for a Civil Aeronautics Board
to parcel out—and restrict—routes between various cities. But in the
case of air pollution we are dealing not so much with private property
*in the air* as with protecting private property in one’s lungs, fields,
and orchards. The vital fact about air pollution is that the polluter
sends unwanted and unbidden pollutants—from smoke to nuclear radiation
to sulfur oxides—*through* the air and into the lungs of innocent
victims, as well as onto their material property. All such emanations
which injure person or property constitute aggression against the
private property of the victims. Air pollution, after all, is just as
much aggression as committing arson against another’s property or
injuring him physically. Air pollution that injures others is aggression
pure and simple. The major function of government—of courts and
police—is to stop aggression; instead, the government has failed in this
task and has failed grievously to exercise its defense function against
air pollution.

It is important to realize that this failure has *not* been a question
purely of ignorance, a simple time lag between recognizing a new
technological problem and facing up to it. For if some of the modern
pollutants have only recently become known, factory smoke and many of
its bad effects have been known ever since the Industrial Revolution,
known to the extent that the American courts, during the late—and as far
back as the early-nineteenth century made the deliberate decision to
allow property rights to be violated by industrial smoke. To do so, the
courts had to—and did—systematically change and weaken the defenses of
property right embedded in Anglo-Saxon common law. Before the mid and
late nineteenth century, any injurious air pollution was considered a
tort, a nuisance against which the victim could sue for damages and
against which he could take out an injunction to cease and desist from
any further invasion of his property rights. But during the nineteenth
century, the courts systematically altered the law of negligence and the
law of nuisance to *permit* any air pollution which was not unusually
greater than any similar manufacturing firm, one that was not more
extensive than the customary practice of fellow polluters.

As factories began to arise and emit smoke, blighting the orchards of
neighboring farmers, the farmers would take the manufacturers to court,
asking for damages and injunctions against further invasion of their
property. But the judges said, in effect, “Sorry. We know that
industrial smoke (i.e., air pollution) invades and interferes with your
property rights. But there is something *more important* than mere
property rights: and that is public policy, the ‘common good.’ And the
common good decrees that industry is a good thing, industrial progress
is a good thing, and therefore your mere private property rights must be
overridden on behalf of the general welfare.” And now all of us are
paying the bitter price for this overriding of private property, in the
form of lung disease and countless other ailments. And all for the
“common good”!^[17](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn17)^

That this principle has guided the courts during the air age as well may
be seen by a decision of the Ohio courts in *Antonik v. Chamberlain*
(1947). The residents of a suburban area near Akron sued to enjoin the
defendants from operating a privately owned airport. The grounds were
invasion of property rights through excessive noise. Refusing the
injunction, the court declared:

> In our business of judging in this case, while sitting as a court of
> equity, we must not only weigh the conflict of interests between the
> airport owner and the nearby landowners, but we must further recognize
> the public policy of the generation in which we live. We must
> recognize that the establishment of an airport... is of great concern
> to the public, and if such an airport is abated, or its establishment
> prevented, the consequences will be not only a serious injury to the
> owner of the port property but may be a serious loss of a valuable
> asset to the entire community.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn18)^

To cap the crimes of the judges, legislatures, federal and state, moved
in to cement the aggression by prohibiting victims of air pollution from
engaging in “class action” suits against polluters. Obviously, if a
factory pollutes the atmosphere of a city where there are tens of
thousands of victims, it is impractical for each victim to sue to
collect his particular damages from the polluter (although an
*injunction* could be used effectively by one small victim). The common
law, therefore, recognizes the validity of “class action” suits, in
which one or a few victims can sue the aggressor not only on their own
behalf, but on behalf of the entire *class* of similar victims. But the
legislatures systematically outlawed such class action suits in
pollution cases. For this reason, a victim may successfully sue a
polluter who injures him individually, in a one-to-one “private
nuisance” suit. But he is prohibited by law from acting against a mass
polluter who is injuring a large number of people in a given area! As
Frank Bubb writes, “It is as if the government were to tell you that it
will (attempt to) protect you from a thief who steals only from you, but
it will not protect you if the thief also steals from everyone else in
the neighborhood.”^[19](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn19)^

*Noise*, too, is a form of air pollution. Noise is the creation of sound
waves which go through the air and then bombard and invade the property
and persons of others. Only recently have physicians begun to
investigate the damaging effects of noise on the human physiology.
Again, a libertarian legal system would permit damage and class action
suits and injunctions against excessive and damaging noise: against
“noise pollution.”

The remedy against air pollution is therefore crystal clear, and it has
nothing to do with multibillion-dollar palliative government programs at
the expense of the taxpayers which do not even meet the real issue. The
remedy is simply for the courts to return to their function of defending
person and property rights against invasion, and therefore to enjoin
anyone from injecting pollutants into the air. But what of the
propollution defenders of industrial progress? And what of the increased
costs that would have to be borne by the consumer? And what of our
present polluting technology?

The argument that such an injunctive prohibition against pollution would
add to the costs of industrial production is as reprehensible as the
pre-Civil War argument that the abolition of slavery would add to the
costs of growing cotton, and that therefore abolition, however morally
correct, was “impractical.” For this means that the polluters are able
to impose all of the high costs of pollution upon those whose lungs and
property rights they have been allowed to invade with impunity.

Furthermore, the cost and technology argument overlooks the vital fact
that if air pollution is allowed to proceed with impunity, there
continues to be no economic incentive to develop a technology that will
*not* pollute. On the contrary, the incentive would continue to cut, as
it has for a century, precisely the other way. Suppose, for example,
that in the days when automobiles and trucks were first being used, the
courts had ruled as follows:

> Ordinarily, we would be opposed to trucks invading people’s lawns as
> an invasion of private property, and we would insist that trucks
> confine themselves to the roads, regardless of traffic congestion. But
> trucks are vitally important to the public welfare, and therefore we
> decree that trucks should be allowed to cross any lawns they wish
> provided they believe that this would ease their traffic problems.

If the courts had ruled in this way, then we would now have a
transportation system in which lawns would be systematically desecrated
by trucks. And any attempt to stop this would be decried in the name of
modern transportation needs! The point is that this is precisely the way
that the courts ruled on air pollution—pollution which is far more
damaging to all of us than trampling on lawns. In this way, the
government gave the green light, from the very start, to a polluting
technology. It is no wonder then that this is precisely the kind of
technology we have. The only remedy is to force the polluting invaders
to stop their invasion, and thereby to redirect technology into
nonpolluting or even antipolluting channels.

Already, even at our necessarily primitive stage in antipollution
technology, techniques have been developed to combat air and noise
pollution. Mufflers can be installed on noisy machines that emit sound
waves precisely contra-cyclical to the waves of the machines, and
thereby can cancel out these racking sounds. Air wastes can even now be
recaptured as they leave the chimney and be recycled to yield products
useful to industry. Thus, sulfur dioxide, a major noxious air pollutant,
can be captured and recycled to produce economically valuable sulfuric
acid.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn20)^ The highly polluting spark
ignition engine will either have to be “cured” by new devices or
replaced altogether by such nonpolluting engines as diesel, gas turbine,
or steam, or by an electric car. And, as libertarian systems engineer
Robert Poole, Jr., points out, the costs of installing the non- or
antipolluting technology would then “ultimately be borne by the
consumers of the firms’ products, i.e., by those who *choose* to
associate with the firm, rather than being passed on to innocent third
parties in the form of pollution (or as
taxes).”^[21](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn21)^

Robert Poole cogently defines pollution “as the transfer of harmful
matter or energy to the person or property of another, without the
latter’s consent.”^[22](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn22)^ The libertarian—and
the only complete—solution to the problem of air pollution is to use the
courts and the legal structure to combat and prevent such invasion.
There are recent signs that the legal system is beginning to change in
this direction: new judicial decisions and repeal of laws disallowing
class action suits. But this is only a
beginning.^[23](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn23)^

Among conservatives—in contrast to libertarians—there are two ultimately
similar responses to the problem of air pollution. One response, by Ayn
Rand and Robert Moses among others, is to deny that the problem exists,
and to attribute the entire agitation to leftists who want to destroy
capitalism and technology on behalf of a tribal form of socialism. While
part of this charge may be correct, denial of the very existence of the
problem is to deny science itself and to give a vital hostage to the
leftist charge that defenders of capitalism “place property rights above
human rights.” Moreover, a defense of air pollution does not even defend
property rights; on the contrary, it puts these conservatives’ stamp of
approval on those industrialists who are trampling upon the property
rights of the mass of the citizenry.

A second, and more sophisticated, conservative response is by such
free-market economists as Milton Friedman. The Friedmanites concede the
existence of air pollution but propose to meet it, *not* by a defense of
property rights, but rather by a supposedly utilitarian “cost-benefit”
calculation by government, which will then make and enforce a “social
decision” on *how much* pollution to allow. This decision would then be
enforced either by licensing a given amount of pollution (the granting
of “pollution rights”), by a graded scale of taxes against it, or by the
taxpayers paying firms *not* to pollute. Not only would these proposals
grant an enormous amount of bureaucratic power to government in the name
of safeguarding the “free market”; they would continue to override
property rights in the name of a collective decision enforced by the
State. This is far from any genuine “free market,” and reveals that, as
in many other economic areas, it is impossible to *really* defend
freedom and the free market without insisting on defending the rights of
private property. Friedman’s grotesque dictum that those urban
inhabitants who don’t wish to contract emphysema should move to the
country is starkly reminiscent of Marie Antoinette’s famous “Let them
eat cake”—and reveals a lack of sensitivity to human or property rights.
Friedman’s statement, in fact, is of a piece with the typically
conservative, “If you don’t like it here, leave,” a statement that
implies that the government rightly owns the entire land area of “here,”
and that anyone who objects to its rule must therefore leave the area.
Robert Poole’s libertarian critique of the Friedmanite proposals offers
a refreshing contrast:

> Unfortunately, it is an example of the most serious failing of the
> conservative economists: nowhere in the proposal is there any mention
> of *rights*. This is the same failing that has undercut advocates of
> capitalism for 200 years. Even today, the term “laissez-faire” is apt
> to bring forth images of eighteenth century English factory towns
> engulfed in smoke and grimy with soot. The early capitalists agreed
> with the courts that smoke and soot were the “price” that must be paid
> for the benefits of industry. ... Yet laissez-faire without rights is
> a contradiction in terms; the laissez-faire position is based on and
> derived from man’s rights, and can endure only when rights are held
> inviolable. Now, in an age of increasing awareness of the environment,
> this old contradiction is coming back to haunt capitalism.
>
> It is *true* that air is a scarce resource \[as the Friedmanites
> say\], but one must then ask *why* it is scarce. If it is scarce
> because of a systematic violation of rights, then the solution is not
> to raise the price of the status quo, thereby sanctioning the
> rights-violations, but to assert the rights and demand that they be
> protected. ... When a factory discharges a great quantity of sulfur
> dioxide molecules that enter someone’s lungs and cause pulmonary
> edema, the factory owners have aggressed against him as much as if
> they had broken his leg. The point must be emphasized because it is
> vital to the libertarian laissez-faire position. A laissez-faire
> polluter is a contradiction in terms and must be identified as such. A
> libertarian society would be a *full-liability* society, where
> everyone is fully responsible for his actions and any harmful
> consequences they might cause.^[24](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn24)^

In addition to betraying its presumed function of defending private
property, government has contributed to air pollution in a more positive
sense. It was not so long ago that the Department of Agriculture
conducted mass sprayings of DDT by helicopter over large areas,
overriding the wishes of individual objecting farmers. It *still*
continues to pour tons of poisonous and carcinogenic insecticides all
over the South in an expensive and vain attempt to eradicate the fire
ant.^[25](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn25)^ And the Atomic Energy Commission
has poured radioactive wastes into the air and into the ground by means
of its nuclear power plants, and through atomic testing. Municipal power
and water plants, and the plants of licensed monopoly utility companies,
mightily pollute the atmosphere. One of the major tasks of the State in
this area is therefore to stop its *own* poisoning of the atmosphere.

Thus, when we peel away the confusions and the unsound philosophy of the
modern ecologists, we find an important bedrock case against the
existing system; but the case turns out to be not against capitalism,
private property, growth, or technology per se. It is a case against the
failure of government to allow and to defend the rights of private
property against invasion. If property rights were to be defended fully,
against private and governmental invasion alike, we would find here, as
in other areas of our economy and society, that private enterprise and
modern technology would come to mankind not as a curse but as its
salvation.

