# 9 INFLATION AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE: THE COLLAPSE OF THE KEYNESIAN PARADIGM [16-chap09.html#page213]

Until the years 1973–1974, the Keynesians who had formed the ruling
economic orthodoxy since the late 1930s had been riding high, wide, and
handsome.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn1)^ Virtually everyone had
accepted the Keynesian view that there is something in the free-market
economy that makes it subject to swings of under- and overspending (in
practice, the Keynesian concern is almost exclusively with alleged
*under*spending), and that hence it is the function of the government to
compensate for this market defect. The government was to compensate for
this alleged imbalance by manipulating its spending and deficits (in
practice, to increase them). Guiding this vital “macroeconomic” function
of government, of course, was to be a board of Keynesian economists (the
“Council of Economic Advisors”), who would be able to “fine-tune” the
economy so as to prevent either inflation or recession, and to regulate
the proper amount of total spending so as to insure continuing full
employment without inflation.

It was in 1973–1974 that even the Keynesians finally realized that
something was very, very wrong with this confident scenario, that it was
time to go back in confusion to their drawing boards. For not only had
40-odd years of Keynesian fine-tuning *not* eliminated a chronic
inflation that had set in with World War II, but it was in those years
that inflation escalated temporarily into double-digit figures (to about
13 percent per annum). Not only that, it was also in 1973–1974 that the
United States plunged into its deepest and longest recession since the
1930s (it would have been called a “depression” if the term hadn’t long
since been abandoned as impolitic by economists). This curious
phenomenon of a vaunting inflation occurring *at the same time* as a
steep recession was simply *not supposed to happen* in the Keynesian
view of the world. Economists had always known that either the economy
is in a boom period, in which case prices are rising, *or else* the
economy is in a recession or depression marked by high unemployment, in
which case prices are falling. In the boom, the Keynesian government was
supposed to “sop up excess purchasing power” by increasing taxes,
according to the Keynesian prescription—that is, it was supposed to take
spending out of the economy; in the recession, on the other hand, the
government was supposed to increase its spending and its deficits, in
order to pump spending into the economy. But if the economy should be in
an inflation *and* a recession with heavy unemployment *at the same
time*, what in the world was government supposed to do? How could it
step on the economic accelerator *and* brake at the same time?

As early as the recession of 1958, things had started to work
peculiarly; for the first time, in the midst of a recession, consumer
goods prices rose, if only slightly. It was a cloud no bigger than a
man’s hand, and it seemed to give Keynesians little to worry about.

Consumer prices, again, rose in the recession of 1966, but this was such
a mild recession that no one worried about that either. The sharp
inflation of the recession of 1969–1971, however, was a considerable
jolt. But it took the steep recession that began in the midst of the
double-digit inflation of 1973–1974 to throw the Keynesian economic
establishment into permanent disarray. It made them realize that not
only had fine-tuning failed, not only was the supposedly dead and buried
cycle still with us, but now the economy was in a state of chronic
inflation and getting worse—and it was also subject to continuing bouts
of recession: of inflationary recession, or “stagflation.” It was not
only a new phenomenon, it was one that could not be explained, that
could not even *exist,* in the theories of economic orthodoxy.

And the inflation appeared to be getting worse: approximately 1–2
percent per annum in the Eisenhower years, up to 3–4 percent during the
Kennedy era, to 5–6 percent in the Johnson administration, then up to
about 13 percent in 1973–1974, and then falling “back” to about 6
percent, but only under the hammer blows of a steep and prolonged
depression (approximately 1973–1976).

There are several things, then, which need almost desperately to be
explained: (1) Why the chronic and accelerating inflation? (2) Why an
inflation even during deep depressions? And while we are at it, it would
be important to explain, if we could, (3) Why the business cycle at all?
Why the seemingly unending round of boom and bust?

Fortunately, the answers to these questions are at hand, provided by the
tragically neglected “Austrian School” of economics and its theory of
the money and business cycle, developed in Austria by Ludwig von Mises
and his follower Friedrich A. Hayek and brought to the London School of
Economics by Hayek in the early 1930s. Actually, Hayek’s Austrian
business cycle theory swept the younger economists in Britain precisely
because it alone offered a satisfactory explanation of the Great
Depression of the 1930s. Such future Keynesian leaders as John R. Hicks,
Abba P. Lerner, Lionel Robbins, and Nicholas Kaldor in England, as well
as Alvin Hansen in the United States, had been Hayekians only a few
years earlier. Then, Keynes’s *General Theory* swept the boards after
1936 in a veritable “Keynesian Revolution,” which arrogantly proclaimed
that no one before it had presumed to offer any explanation whatever of
the business cycle or of the Great Depression. It should be emphasized
that the Keynesian theory did *not* win out by carefully debating and
refuting the Austrian position; on the contrary, as often happens in the
history of social science, Keynesianism simply became the new fashion,
and the Austrian theory was not refuted but only ignored and forgotten.

For four decades, the Austrian theory was kept alive, unwept, unhonored,
and unsung by most of the world of economics: only Mises (at NYU) and
Hayek (at Chicago) themselves and a few followers still clung to the
theory. Surely it is no accident that the current renaissance of
Austrian economics has coincided with the phenomenon of stagflation and
its consequent shattering of the Keynesian paradigm for all to see. In
1974 the first conference of Austrian School economists in decades was
held at Royalton College in Vermont. Later that year, the economics
profession was astounded by the Nobel Prize being awarded to Hayek.
Since then, there have been notable Austrian conferences at the
University of Hartford, at Windsor Castle in England, and at New York
University, with even Hicks and Lerner showing signs of at least
partially returning to their own long-neglected position. Regional
conferences have been held on the East Coast, on the West Coast, in the
Middle West, and in the Southwest. Books are being published in this
field, and, perhaps most important, a number of extremely able graduate
students and young professors devoted to Austrian economics have emerged
and will undoubtedly be contributing a great deal in the future.

## MONEY AND INFLATION [money-and-inflation]

What, then, does this resurgent Austrian theory have to say about our
problem?^[2](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn2)^ The first thing to point out is
that inflation is not ineluctably built into the economy, nor is it a
prerequisite for a growing and thriving world. During most of the
nineteenth century (apart from the years of the War of 1812 and the
Civil War), prices were falling, *and yet* the economy was growing and
industrializing. Falling prices put no damper whatsoever on business or
economic prosperity.

Thus, falling prices are apparently the *normal* functioning of a
growing market economy. So how is it that the very idea of steadily
falling prices is so counter to our experience that it seems a totally
unrealistic dream-world? Why, since World War II, have prices gone up
continuously, and even swiftly, in the United States and throughout the
world? Before that point, prices had gone up steeply during World War I
and World War II; in between, they fell slightly despite the great boom
of the 1920s, and then fell steeply during the Great Depression of the
1930s. In short, apart from wartime experiences, the idea of inflation
as a peacetime norm really arrived after World War II.

The favorite explanation of inflation is that greedy businessmen persist
in putting up prices in order to increase their profits. But surely the
quotient of business “greed” has not suddenly taken a great leap forward
since World War II. Weren’t businesses equally “greedy” in the
nineteenth century and up to 1941? So why was there no inflation trend
then? Moreover, if businessmen are so avaricious as to jack up prices 10
percent per year, why do they stop there? Why do they wait; why don’t
they raise prices by 50 percent, or double or triple them immediately?
*What holds them back?*

A similar flaw rebuts another favorite explanation of inflation: that
unions insist on higher wage rates, which in turn leads businessmen to
raise prices. Apart from the fact that inflation appeared as long ago as
ancient Rome and long before unions arrived on the scene, and apart from
the lack of evidence that union wages go up faster than nonunion or that
prices of unionized products rise faster than of nonunionized, a similar
question arises: Why don’t businesses raise their prices *anyway?* What
is it that permits them to raise prices by a certain amount, but *not*
by more? If unions are that powerful, and businesses that responsive,
why don’t wages and prices rise by 50 percent, or 100 percent, per year?
*What holds them back?*

A government-inspired TV propaganda campaign a few years ago got a bit
closer to the mark: consumers were blamed for inflation by being too
“piggy,” by eating and spending too much. We have here at least the
beginning of an explanation of what holds businesses or unions back from
demanding still higher prices: consumers won’t pay them. Coffee prices
zoomed upward a few years ago; a year or two later they fell sharply
because of consumer resistance—to some extent from a flashy consumer
“boycott”—but more importantly from a shift in consumer buying habits
away from coffee and toward lower-priced substitutes. So a limit on
consumer demand holds them hack.

But this pushes the problem one step backward. For if consumer demand,
as seems logical, is limited at any given time, how come it keeps going
up, year after year, and validating or permitting price and wage
increases? And if it can go up by 10 percent, what keeps it from going
up by 50 percent? In short, what enables consumer demand to keep going
up, year after year, and yet keeps it from going up any further?

To go any further in this detective hunt we must analyze the meaning of
the term “price.” What exactly *is* a price? The price of any given
quantity of a product is the amount of money the buyer must spend on it.
In short, if someone must spend seven dollars on ten loaves of bread,
then the “price” of those ten loaves is seven dollars, or, since we
usually express price per unit of product, the price of bread is 70
cents per loaf. So there are two sides to this exchange: the buyer with
money and the seller with bread. It should be clear that the interaction
of both sides brings about the ruling price in the market. In short, if
more bread comes onto the market, the price of bread will be bid down
(increased supply lowers the price); while, on the other hand, if the
bread buyers have more money in their wallets, the price of bread will
be bid higher (increased demand raises the price).

We have now found the crucial element that limits and holds back the
amount of consumer demand and hence the price: the amount of money in
the consumers’ possession. If the money in their pockets increases by 20
percent, then the limitation on their demand is relaxed by 20 percent,
and, other things remaining equal, prices will tend to rise by 20
percent as well. We have found the crucial factor: the stock or the
supply of money.

If we consider prices across-the-board for the entire economy, then the
crucial factor is the total stock or supply of money in the whole
economy. In fact, the importance of the money supply in analyzing
inflation may be seen in extending our treatment from the bread or
coffee market to the overall economy. For *all* prices are determined
inversely by the supply of the good and directly by the demand for it.
But the supplies of goods are, in general, going up year after year in
our still growing economy. So that, from the point of view of the supply
side of the equation, most prices should be *falling*, and we should
right now be experiencing a nineteenth-century-style steady fall in
prices (“deflation”). If chronic inflation were due to the supply
side—to activities by producers such as business firms or unions—then
the supply of goods overall would necessarily be falling, thereby
raising prices. But since the supply of goods is manifestly increasing,
the source of inflation must be the demand side—and the dominant factor
on the demand side, as we have indicated, is the total supply of money.

And, indeed, if we look at the world past and present, we find that the
money supply has been going up at a rapid pace. It rose in the
nineteenth century, too, but at a much slower pace, far slower than the
increase of goods and services; but, since World War II, the increase in
the money supply—both here and abroad—has been much faster than in the
supply of goods. Hence, inflation.

The crucial question then becomes who, or what, controls and determines
the money supply, and keeps increasing its amount, especially in recent
decades? To answer this question, we must first consider how money
arises to begin with in the market economy. For money first arises on
the market as individuals begin to choose one or several useful
commodities to act as a money: the best money-commodities are those that
are in high demand; that have a high value per unit-weight; that are
durable, so they can be stored a long time, mobile, so they can be moved
readily from one place to another, and easily recognizable; and that can
be readily divisible into small parts without losing their value. Over
the centuries, various markets and societies have chosen a large number
of commodities as money: from salt to sugar to cowrie shells to cattle
to tobacco down to cigarettes in POW camps during World War II. But over
all these centuries, two commodities have always won out in the
competitive race to become moneys when they have been available: gold
and silver.

Metals always circulate by their weight—a *ton* of iron, a *pound* of
copper, etc.—and their prices are reckoned in terms of these units of
weight. Gold and silver are no exception. Every one of the modern
currency units originated as units of weight of either gold or silver.
Thus, the British unit, the “pound sterling,” is so named because it
originally meant simply *one pound of silver*. (To see how the pound has
lost value in the centuries since, we should note that the pound
sterling is now worth two-fifths of an *ounce* of silver on the market.
This is the effect of British inflation—of the *debasement* of the value
of the pound.) The “dollar” was originally a Bohemian coin consisting of
an ounce of silver. Later on, the “dollar” came to be defined as
one-twentieth of an ounce of gold.

When a society or a country comes to adopt a certain commodity as a
money, and its unit of weight then becomes the unit of currency—the unit
of reckoning in everyday life—then that country is said to be on that
particular commodity “standard.” Since markets have universally found
gold or silver to be the best standards whenever they are available, the
natural course of these economies is to be on the gold or silver
standard. In that case, the supply of gold is determined by market
forces: by the technological conditions of supply, the prices of other
commodities, etc.

From the beginning of market adoption of gold and silver as money, the
State has been moving in to seize control of the money-supply function,
the function of determining and creating the supply of money in the
society. It should be obvious why the State should want to do so: this
would mean seizing control over the money supply from the market and
turning it over to a group of people in charge of the State apparatus.
Why they should want to do so is clear: here would be an alternative to
taxation which the victims of a tax always consider onerous.

For now the rulers of the State can simply create their own money and
spend it or lend it out to their favorite allies. None of this was easy
until the discovery of the art of printing; after that, the State could
contrive to change the definition of the “dollar,” the “pound,” the
“mark,” etc., from units of weight of gold or silver into simply the
*names* for pieces of paper printed by the central government. Then that
government could print them costlessly and virtually *ad lib*, and then
spend or lend them out to its heart’s content. It took centuries for
this complex movement to be completed, but now the stock and the
issuance of money is totally in the hands of every central government.
The consequences are increasingly visible all around us.

Consider what would happen if the government should approach one group
of people—say the Jones family—and say to them: “Here we give you the
absolute and unlimited power to print dollars, to determine the number
of dollars in circulation. And you will have an absolute monopoly power:
anyone else who presumes to use such power will be jailed for a long,
long time as an evil and subversive counterfeiter. We hope you use this
power wisely.” We can pretty well predict what the Jones family will do
with this newfound power. At first, it will use the power slowly and
carefully, to pay off its debts, perhaps buy itself a few particularly
desired items; but then, habituated to the heady wine of being able to
print their own currency, they will begin to use the power to the hilt,
to buy luxuries, reward their friends, etc. The result will be
continuing and even accelerated increases in the money supply, and
therefore continuing and accelerated inflation.

But this is precisely what governments—all governments—*have* done.
Except that instead of granting the monopoly power to counterfeit to the
Jones or other families, government has “granted” the power to *itself*.
Just as the State arrogates to itself a monopoly power over legalized
kidnapping and calls it *conscription*; just as it has acquired a
monopoly over legalized robbery and calls it *taxation;* so, too, it has
acquired the monopoly power to counterfeit and calls it increasing the
supply of dollars (or francs, marks, or whatever). Instead of a gold
standard, instead of a money that emerges from and whose supply is
determined by the free market, we are living under a fiat paper
standard. That is, the dollar, franc, etc., are simply pieces of paper
with such names stamped upon them, issued at will by the central
government—by the State apparatus.

Furthermore, since the interest of a counterfeiter is to print as much
money as he can get away with, so too will the State print as much money
as *it* can get away with, just as it will employ the power to tax in
the same way: to extract as much money as it can without raising too
many howls of protest.

Government control of money supply is inherently inflationary, then, for
the same reason that *any* system in which a group of people obtains
control over the printing of money is bound to be inflationary.

## THE FEDERAL RESERVE AND FRACTIONAL RESERVE BANKING [the-federal-reserve-and-fractional-reserve-banking]

Inflating by simply printing more money, however, is now considered
old-fashioned. For one thing, it is too *visible*; with a lot of
high-denomination bills floating around, the public might get the
troublesome idea that the cause of the unwelcome inflation is the
government’s printing of all the bills—and the government might be
stripped of that power. Instead, governments have come up with a much
more complex and sophisticated, and much less visible, means of doing
the same thing: of organizing increases in the money supply to give
themselves more money to spend and to subsidize favored political
groups. The idea was this: instead of stressing the printing of money,
retain the paper dollars or marks or francs as the basic money (the
“legal tender”), and then pyramid on top of that a mysterious and
invisible, but no less potent, “checkbook money,” or bank demand
deposits. The result is an inflationary engine, controlled by
government, which no one but bankers, economists, and government central
bankers understands—and designedly so.

First, it must be realized that the entire commercial banking system, in
the United States or elsewhere, is under the total control of the
central government—a control that the banks welcome, for it permits them
to create money. The banks are under the complete control of the central
bank—a government institution—a control stemming largely from the
central bank’s compulsory monopoly over the printing of money. In the
United States, the Federal Reserve System performs this central banking
function. The Federal Reserve (“the Fed”) then permits the commercial
banks to pyramid bank demand deposits (“checkbook money”) on top of
their own “reserves” (deposits at the Fed) by a multiple of
approximately 6:1. In other words, if bank reserves at the Fed increase
by \$1 billion, the banks can and do pyramid their deposits by \$6
billion—that is, the banks create \$6 billion worth of new money.

Why do bank demand deposits constitute the major part of the money
supply? Officially, they are not money or legal tender in the way that
Federal Reserve Notes are money. But they constitute a promise by a bank
that it will redeem its demand deposits in cash (Federal Reserve Notes)
anytime that the depositholder (the owner of the “checking account”) may
desire. The point, of course, is that the banks *don’t have* the money;
they cannot, since they owe six times their reserves, which are their
own checking account at the Fed. The public, however, is induced to
trust the banks by the penumbra of soundness and sanctity laid about
them by the Federal Reserve System. For the Fed can and does bail out
banks in trouble. If the public understood the process and descended in
a storm upon the banks demanding their money, the Fed, in a pinch, if it
wanted, could always *print* enough money to tide the banks over.

The Fed, then, controls the rate of monetary inflation by adjusting the
multiple (6:1) of bank money creation, or, more importantly, by
determining the total amount of bank reserves. In other words, if the
Fed wishes to increase the total money supply by \$6 billion, instead of
actually printing the \$6 billion, it will contrive to increase bank
reserves by \$1 billion, and then leave it up to the banks to create \$6
billion of new checkbook money. The public, meanwhile, is kept ignorant
of the process or of its significance.

How do the banks create new deposits? Simply by lending them out in the
process of creation. Suppose, for example, that the banks receive the
\$1 billion of new reserves; the banks will lend out \$6 billion and
create the new deposits in the course of making these new loans. In
short, when the commercial banks lend money to an individual, a business
firm, or the government, they are *not* relending existing money that
the public laboriously had saved and deposited in their vaults—as the
public usually believes. They lend out new demand deposits that they
create in the course of the loan—and they are limited only by the
“reserve requirements,” by the required maximum multiple of deposit to
reserves (e.g., 6:1). For, after all, they are not printing paper
dollars or digging up pieces of gold; they are simply issuing deposit or
“checkbook” claims upon themselves for cash—claims which they wouldn’t
have a prayer of honoring if the public as a whole should ever rise up
at once and demand such a settling of their accounts.

How, then, does the Fed contrive to determine (almost always, to
*increase*) the total reserves of the commercial banks? It can and does
*lend* reserves to the banks, and it does so at an artificially cheap
rate (the “rediscount rate”). But still, the banks do not like to be
heavily in debt to the Fed, and so the total loans outstanding from the
Fed to the banks is never very high. By far the most important route for
the Fed’s determining of total reserves is little known or understood by
the public: the method of “open market purchases.” What this simply
means is that the Federal Reserve Bank goes out into the open market and
buys an asset. Strictly, it doesn’t matter what kind of an asset the Fed
buys. It could, for example, be a pocket calculator for \$20. Suppose
that the Fed buys a pocket calculator from XYZ Electronics for \$20. The
Fed acquires a calculator; but the important point for our purposes is
that XYZ Electronics acquires a check for \$20 from the Federal Reserve
Bank. Now, the Fed is not open to checking accounts from private
citizens, only from banks and the federal government itself. XYZ
Electronics, therefore, can only do one thing with its twenty-dollar
check: deposit it at its own bank, say the Acme Bank. At this point,
another transaction takes place: XYZ gets an increase of \$20 in its
checking account, in its “demand deposits.” In return, Acme Bank gets a
check, made over to itself, from the Federal Reserve Bank.

Now, the first thing that has happened is that XYZ’s money stock has
gone up by \$20—its newly increased account at the Acme Bank—and nobody
else’s money stock has changed at all. So, at the end of this initial
phase—phase I—the money supply has increased by \$20, the same amount as
the Fed’s purchase of an asset. If one asks, where did the Fed get the
\$20 to buy the calculator, then the answer is: it created the \$20 *out
of thin air* by simply writing out a check upon itself. No one, neither
the Fed nor anyone else, *had* the \$20 before it was created in the
process of the Fed’s expenditure.

But this is not all. For now the Acme Bank, to its delight, finds it has
a check on the Federal Reserve. It rushes to the Fed, deposits it, and
acquires an increase of \$20 in its reserves, that is, in its “demand
deposits with the Fed.” Now that the banking system has an increase in
\$20, it can and does expand credit, that is, create more demand
deposits in the form of loans to business (or to consumers or
government), until the total increase in checkbook money is \$120. At
the end of phase II, then, we have an increase of \$20 in bank reserves
generated by Fed purchase of a calculator for that amount, an increase
in \$120 in bank demand deposits, and an increase of \$100 in bank loans
to business or others. The total money supply has increased by \$120, of
which \$100 was created by the banks in the course of lending out
checkbook money to business, and \$20 was created by the Fed in the
course of buying the calculator.

In practice, of course, the Fed does not spend much of its time buying
haphazard assets. Its purchases of assets are so huge in order to
inflate the economy that it must settle on a regular, highly liquid
asset. In practice, this means purchases of U.S. government bonds and
other U.S. government securities. The U.S. government bond market is
huge and highly liquid, and the Fed does not have to get into the
political conflicts that would be involved in figuring out which private
stocks or bonds to purchase. For the government, this process also has
the happy consequence of helping to prop up the government security
market, and keep up the price of government bonds.

Suppose, however, that some bank, perhaps under the pressure of its
depositors, might have to cash in some of its checking account reserves
in order to acquire hard currency. What would happen to the Fed then,
since its checks had created new bank reserves out of thin air? Wouldn’t
it be forced to go bankrupt or the equivalent? No, because the Fed has a
monopoly on the printing of cash, and it could—and would—simply redeem
its demand deposit by printing whatever Federal Reserve Notes are
needed. In short, if a bank came to the Fed and demanded \$20 in cash
for its reserve—or, indeed, if it demanded \$20 million—all the Fed
would have to do is print that amount and pay it out. As we can see,
being able to print its own money places the Fed in a uniquely enviable
position.

So here we have, at long last, the key to the mystery of the modern
inflationary process. It is a process of continually expanding the money
supply through continuing Fed purchases of government securities on the
open market. Let the Fed wish to increase the money supply by \$6
billion, and it will purchase government securities on the open market
to a total of \$1 billion (if the money multiplier of demand
deposits/reserves is 6:1) and the goal will be speedily accomplished. In
fact, week after week, even as these lines are being read, the Fed goes
into the open market in New York and purchases whatever amount of
government bonds it has decided upon, and thereby helps decide upon the
amount of monetary inflation.

The monetary history of this century has been one of repeated loosening
of restraints on the State’s propensity to inflate, the removal of one
check after another until now the government is able to inflate the
money supply, and therefore prices, at will. In 1913, the Federal
Reserve System was created to enable this sophisticated pyramiding
process to take place. The new system permitted a large expansion of the
money supply, and of inflation to pay for war expenditures in World War
I. In 1933, another fateful step was taken: the United States government
took the country off the gold standard, that is, dollars, while still
legally defined in terms of a weight of gold, were no longer redeemable
in gold. In short, before 1933, there was an important shackle upon the
Fed’s ability to inflate and expand the money supply: Federal Reserve
Notes themselves were payable in the equivalent weight of gold.

There is, of course, a crucial difference between gold and Federal
Reserve Notes. The government cannot create new gold at will. Gold has
to be dug, in a costly process, out of the ground. But Federal Reserve
Notes can be issued at will, at virtually zero cost in resources. In
1933, the United States government removed the gold restraint on its
inflationary potential by shifting to fiat money: to making the paper
dollar itself the standard of money, with government the monopoly
supplier of dollars. It was going off the gold standard that paved the
way for the mighty U.S. money and price inflation during and after World
War II.

But there was still one fly in the inflationary ointment, one restraint
left on the U.S. government’s propensity for inflation. While the United
States had gone off gold domestically, it was still pledged to redeem
any paper dollars (and ultimately bank dollars) held by foreign
governments in gold should they desire to do so. We were, in short,
still on a restricted and aborted form of gold standard
*internationally*. Hence, as the United States inflated the money supply
and prices in the 1950s and 1960s, the dollars and dollar claims (in
paper and checkbook money) piled up in the hands of European
governments. After a great deal of economic finagling and political
arm-twisting to induce foreign governments not to exercise their right
to redeem dollars in gold, the United States, in August 1971, declared
national bankruptcy by repudiating its solemn contractual obligations
and “closing the gold window.” It is no coincidence that this tossing
off of the last vestige of gold restraint upon the governments of the
world was followed by the double-digit inflation of 1973–1974, and by
similar inflation in the rest of the world.

We have now explained the chronic and worsening inflation in the
contemporary world and in the United States: the unfortunate product of
a continuing shift in this century from gold to government-issued paper
as the standard money, and of the development of central banking and the
pyramiding of checkbook money on top of inflated paper currency. Both
interrelated developments amount to one thing: the seizure of control
over the money supply by government.

If we have explained the problem of inflation, we have not yet examined
the problem of the business cycle, of recessions, and of inflationary
recession or stagflation. Why the business cycle, and why the new
mysterious phenomenon of stagflation?

## BANK CREDIT AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE [bank-credit-and-the-business-cycle]

The business cycle arrived in the Western world in the latter part of
the eighteenth century. It was a curious phenomenon, because there
seemed to be no reason for it, and indeed it had not existed before. The
business cycle consisted of a regularly recurring (though not strictly
periodical) series of booms and busts, of inflationary periods marked by
increased business activity, higher employment, and higher prices
followed sharply by recessions or depressions marked by declining
business activity, higher unemployment, and price declines; and then,
after a term of such recession, recovery takes place and the boom phase
begins again.

*A priori*, there is no reason to expect this sort of cyclical pattern
of economic activity. There will be cyclical waves in specific types of
activity, of course; thus, the cycle of the seven-year locust will cause
a seven-year cycle in locust-fighting activity, in the production of
antilocust sprays and equipment, etc. But there is no reason to expect
boom-bust cycles in the overall economy. In fact, there is reason to
expect just the opposite; for usually the free market works smoothly and
efficiently, and especially with no massive cluster of error such as
becomes evident when boom turns suddenly to bust and severe losses are
incurred. And indeed, before the late eighteenth century there were no
such overall cycles. Generally, business went along smoothly and evenly
until a sudden interruption occurred: a wheat famine would cause a
collapse in an agricultural country; the king would seize most of the
money in the hands of financiers, causing a sudden depression; a war
would disrupt trading patterns. In each of these cases, there was a
specific blow to trade brought about by an easily identifiable, one-shot
cause, with no need to search further for explanation.

So why the new phenomenon of the business cycle? It was seen that the
cycle occurred in the most economically advanced areas of each country:
in the port cities, in the areas engaged in trade with the most advanced
world centers of production and activity. Two different and vitally
important phenomena began to emerge on a significant scale in Western
Europe during this period, precisely in the most advanced centers of
production and trade: industrialization and commercial banking. The
commercial banking was the same sort of “fractional reserve” banking we
have analyzed above, with London the site of the world’s first central
bank, the Bank of England, which originated at the turn of the
eighteenth century. By the nineteenth century, in the new discipline of
economics and among financial writers and commentators, two types of
theories began to emerge in an attempt to explain the new and unwelcome
phenomenon: those focussing the blame on the existence of industry, and
those centering upon the banking system. The former, in sum, saw the
responsibility for the business cycle to lie deep within the free-market
economy—and it was easy for such economists to call either for the
abolition of the market (e.g., Karl Marx) or for its drastic control and
regulation by the government in order to alleviate the cycle (e.g., Lord
Keynes). On the other hand, those economists who saw the fault to lie in
the fractional reserve banking system placed the blame outside the
market economy and onto an area—money and banking—which even English
classical liberalism had never taken away from tight government control.
Even in the nineteenth century, then, blaming the banks meant
essentially blaming government for the boom-bust cycle.

We cannot go into details here on the numerous fallacies of the schools
of thought that blame the market economy for the cycles; suffice it to
say that these theories cannot explain the rise in prices in the boom or
the fall in the recession, or the massive cluster of error that emerges
suddenly in the form of severe losses when the boom turns to bust.

The first economists to develop a cycle theory centering on the money
and banking system were the early nineteenth-century English classical
economist David Ricardo and his followers, who developed the “monetary
theory” of the business cycle.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn3)^ The
Ricardian theory went somewhat as follows: the fractional-reserve banks,
spurred and controlled by the government and its central bank, expand
credit. As credit is expanded and pyramided on top of paper money and
gold, the money supply (in the form of bank deposits or, in that
historical period, bank notes) expands. The expansion of the money
supply raises prices and sets the inflationary boom into motion. As the
boom continues, fueled by the pyramiding of bank notes and deposits on
top of gold, domestic prices also increase. But this means that domestic
prices will be higher, and still higher, than the prices of imported
goods, so that imports will increase and exports to foreign lands will
decline. A deficit in the balance of payments will emerge and widen, and
it will have to be paid for by gold flowing out of the inflating country
and into the hard-money countries. But as gold flows out, the expanding
money and banking pyramid will become increasingly top-heavy, and the
banks will find themselves in increasing danger of going bankrupt.
Finally, the government and banks will have to stop their expansion,
and, to save themselves, the banks will have to contract their bank
loans and checkbook money.

The sudden shift from bank credit expansion to contraction reverses the
economic picture and bust quickly follows boom. The banks must pull in
their horns, and businesses and economic activity suffer as the pressure
mounts for debt repayment and contraction. The fall in the supply of
money, in turn, leads to a general fall in prices (“deflation”). The
recession or depression phase has arrived. However, as the money supply
and prices fall, goods again become more competitive with foreign
products and the balance of payments reverses itself, with a surplus
replacing the deficit. Gold flows into the country, and, as bank notes
and deposits contract on top of an expanding gold base, the condition of
the banks becomes much sounder, and recovery gets under way.

The Ricardian theory had several notable features: It accounted for the
behavior of prices by focussing on changes in the supply of bank money
(which indeed always increased in booms and declined in busts). It also
accounted for the behavior of the balance of payments. And, moreover, it
linked the boom and the bust, so that the bust was seen to be the
consequence of the preceding boom. And not only the consequence, but the
salutary means of adjusting the economy to the unwise intervention that
created the inflationary boom.

In short, for the first time, the bust was seen to be neither a
visitation from hell nor a catastrophe generated by the inner workings
of the industrialized market economy. The Ricardians realized that the
major evil was the preceding inflationary boom caused by government
intervention in the money and banking system, and that the recession,
unwelcome though its symptoms may be, is really the necessary adjustment
process by which that interventionary boom gets washed out of the
economic system. The depression is the process by which the market
economy adjusts, throws off the excesses and distortions of the
inflationary boom, and reestablishes a sound economic condition. The
depression is the unpleasant but necessary reaction to the distortions
and excesses of the previous boom.

Why, then, does the business cycle recur? Why does the next
boom-and-bust cycle always begin? To answer that, we have to understand
the motivations of the banks and the government. The commercial banks
live and profit by expanding credit and by creating a new money supply;
so they are naturally inclined to do so, “to monetize credit,” if they
can. The government also wishes to inflate, both to expand its own
revenue (either by printing money or so that the banking system can
finance government deficits) and to subsidize favored economic and
political groups through a boom and cheap credit. So we know why the
initial boom began. The government and the banks had to retreat when
disaster threatened and the crisis point had arrived. But as gold flows
into the country, the condition of the banks becomes sounder. And when
the banks have pretty well recovered, they are then in the confident
position to resume their natural tendency of inflating the supply of
money and credit. And so the *next* boom proceeds on its way, sowing the
seeds for the *next* inevitable bust.

Thus, the Ricardian theory also explained the continuing recurrence of
the business cycle. But two things it did not explain. First, and most
important, it did not explain the massive cluster of error that
businessmen are suddenly seen to have made when the crisis hits and bust
follows boom. For businessmen are trained to be successful forecasters,
and it is not like them to make a sudden cluster of grave error that
forces them to experience widespread and severe losses. Second, another
important feature of every business cycle has been the fact that both
booms and busts have been much more severe in the “capital goods
industries” (the industries making machines, equipment, plant or
industrial raw materials) than in consumer goods industries. And the
Ricardian theory had no way of explaining this feature of the cycle.

The Austrian, or Misesian, theory of the business cycle built on the
Ricardian analysis and developed its own “monetary overinvestment” or,
more strictly, “monetary malinvestment” theory of the business cycle.
The Austrian theory was able to explain not only the phenomena
explicated by the Ricardians, but also the cluster of error and the
greater intensity of capital goods’ cycles. And, as we shall see, it is
the only one that can comprehend the modern phenomenon of stagflation.

Mises begins as did the Ricardians: government and its central bank
stimulate bank credit expansion by purchasing assets and thereby
increasing bank reserves. The banks proceed to expand credit and hence
the nation’s money supply in the form of checking deposits (private bank
notes having virtually disappeared). As with the Ricardians, Mises sees
that this expansion of bank money drives up prices and causes inflation.

But, as Mises pointed out, the Ricardians understated the unfortunate
consequences of bank credit inflation. For something even more sinister
is at work. Bank credit expansion not only raises prices, it also
artificially lowers the rate of interest, and thereby sends misleading
signals to businessmen, causing them to make unsound and uneconomic
investments.

For, on the free and unhampered market, the interest rate on loans is
determined solely by the “time preferences” of all the individuals that
make up the market economy. For the essence of any loan is that a
“present good” (money which can be used at present) is being exchanged
for a “future good” (an IOU which can be used at some point in the
future). Since people always prefer having money right now to the
present *prospect* of getting the same amount of money at some point in
the future, present goods always command a premium over future goods in
the market. That premium, or “agio,” is the interest rate, and its
height will vary according to the degree to which people prefer the
present to the future, i.e., the degree of their time preferences.

People’s time preferences also determine the extent to which people will
save and invest for future use, as compared to how much they will
consume now. If people’s time preferences should fall, i.e., if their
degree of preference for present over future declines, then people will
tend to consume less now and save and invest more; at the same time, and
for the same reason, the rate of interest, the rate of time-discount,
will also fall. Economic growth comes about largely as the result of
falling rates of time preference, which bring about an increase in the
proportion of saving and investment to consumption, as well as a falling
rate of interest.

But what happens when the rate of interest falls *not* because of
voluntary lower time preferences and higher savings on the part of the
public, but from government interference that promotes the expansion of
bank credit and bank money? For the new checkbook money created in the
course of bank loans to business will come onto the market as a supplier
of loans, and will therefore, at least initially, lower the rate of
interest. What happens, in other words, when the rate of interest falls
artificially, due to intervention, rather than naturally, from changes
in the valuations and preferences of the consuming public?

What happens is trouble. For businessmen, seeing the rate of interest
fall, will react as they always must to such a change of market signals:
they will invest more in capital goods. Investments, particularly in
lengthy and time-consuming projects, which *previously* looked
unprofitable, now seem profitable because of the fall in the interest
charge. In short, businessmen react as they would have if savings had
*genuinely* increased: they move to invest those supposed savings. They
expand their investment in durable equipment, in capital goods, in
industrial raw material, and in construction, as compared with their
direct production of consumer goods.

Thus, businesses happily borrow the newly expanded bank money that is
coming to them at cheaper rates; they use the money to invest in capital
goods, and eventually this money gets paid out in higher wages to
workers in the capital goods industries. The increased business demand
bids up labor costs, but businesses think they will be able to pay these
higher costs because they have been fooled by the government-and-bank
intervention in the loan market and by its vitally important tampering
with the interest-rate signal of the marketplace—the signal that
determines how many resources will be devoted to the production of
capital goods and how many to consumer goods.

Problems surface when the workers begin to spend the new bank money that
they have received in the form of higher wages. For the time preferences
of the public have not *really* gotten lower; the public doesn’t *want*
to save more than it has. So the workers set about to consume most of
their new income, in short, to reestablish their old consumer/saving
proportions. This means that they now redirect spending in the economy
back to the consumer goods industries, and that they don’t save and
invest enough to buy the newly produced machines, capital equipment,
industrial raw materials, etc. This lack of enough saving-and-investment
to buy all the new capital goods at expected and existing prices reveals
itself as a sudden, sharp depression in the capital goods industries.
For once the consumers reestablish their desired consumption/investment
proportions, it is thus revealed that business had invested too much in
capital goods (hence the term “monetary overinvestment theory”), and had
also underinvested in consumer goods. Business had been seduced by the
governmental tampering and artificial lowering of the rate of interest
and acted as if more savings were available to invest than were really
there. As soon as the new bank money filtered through the system and the
consumers reestablish their old time-preference proportions, it became
clear that there were not enough savings to buy all the producers’
goods, and that business had misinvested the limited savings available
(“monetary malinvestment theory”). Business had overinvested in capital
goods and underinvested in consumer goods.

The inflationary boom thus leads to distortions of the pricing and
production system. Prices of labor, raw materials, and machines in the
capital goods industries are bid up too high during the boom to be
profitable once the consumers are able to reassert their old
consumption/investment preferences. The “depression” is thus seen—even
more than in the Ricardian theory—as the necessary and healthy period in
which the market economy sloughs off and liquidates the unsound,
uneconomic investments of the boom, and reestablishes those proportions
between consumption and investment that are truly desired by the
consumers. The depression is the painful but necessary process by which
the free market rids itself of the excesses and errors of the boom and
reestablishes the market economy in its function of efficient service to
the mass of consumers. Since the prices of factors of production (land,
labor, machines, raw materials) have been bid too high in the capital
goods industries during the boom, this means that these prices must be
allowed to fall in the recession until proper market proportions of
prices and production are restored.

Put another way, the inflationary boom will not only increase prices in
general, it will also distort relative prices, will distort relations of
one type of price to another. In brief, inflationary credit expansion
will raise all prices; but prices and wages in the capital goods
industries will go up faster than the prices of consumer goods
industries. In short, the boom will be more intense in the capital goods
than in the consumer goods industries. On the other hand, the essence of
the depression adjustment period will be to lower prices and wages in
the capital goods industries relative to consumer goods, in order to
induce resources to move back from the swollen capital goods to the
deprived consumer goods industries. All prices will fall because of the
contraction of bank credit, but prices and wages in capital goods will
fall more sharply than in consumer goods. In short, both the boom and
the bust will be more intense in the capital than in the consumer goods
industries. Hence, we have explained the greater intensity of business
cycles in the former type of industry.

There seems to be a flaw in the theory, however; for, since workers
receive the increased money in the form of higher wages fairly rapidly,
and then begin to reassert their desired consumer/investment
proportions, how is it that booms go on for years without facing
retribution: without having their unsound investments revealed or their
errors caused by bank tampering with market signals made evident? In
short, why does it take so long for the depression adjustment process to
begin its work? The answer is that the booms would indeed be very
short-lived (say, a few months) *if* the bank credit expansion and the
subsequent pushing of interest rates below the free-market level were
just a one-shot affair. But the crucial point is that the credit
expansion is *not* one shot. It proceeds on and on, never giving the
consumers the chance to reestablish their preferred proportions of
consumption and saving, never allowing the rise in cost in the capital
goods industries to catch up to the inflationary rise in prices. Like
the repeated doping of a horse, the boom is kept on its way and ahead of
its inevitable comeuppance by repeated and accelerating doses of the
stimulant of bank credit. It is only when bank credit expansion must
finally stop or sharply slow down, either because the banks are getting
shaky or because the public is getting restive at the continuing
inflation, that retribution finally catches up with the boom. As soon as
credit expansion stops, the piper must be paid, and the inevitable
readjustments must liquidate the unsound over-investments of the boom
and redirect the economy more toward *consumer goods* production. And,
of course, the longer the boom is kept going, the greater the
malinvestments that must be liquidated, and the more harrowing the
readjustments that must be made.

Thus, the Austrian theory accounts for the massive cluster of error
(overinvestments in capital goods industries suddenly revealed as such
by the stopping of the artificial stimulant of credit expansion) and for
the greater intensity of boom and bust in the capital goods than in the
consumer goods industries. Its explanation for the recurrence, for the
inauguration of the next boom, is similar to the Ricardian; once the
liquidations and bankruptcies are undergone, and the price and
production adjustments completed, the economy and the banks begin to
recover, and the banks can set themselves to return to their natural and
desired course of credit expansion.

What of the Austrian explanation—the only proferred explanation—of
stagflation? How is it that, in recent recessions, prices continue to go
up? We must amend this first by pointing out that it is particularly
consumer goods prices that continue to rise during recessions, and that
confound the public by giving them the worst of both worlds at the same
time: high unemployment and increases in the cost of living. Thus,
during the most recent 1974–1976 depression, consumer goods prices rose
rapidly, but wholesale prices remained level, while industrial raw
material prices fell rapidly and substantially. So how is it that the
cost of living continues to rise in current recessions?

Let us go back and examine what happened to prices in the “classic,” or
old-fashioned boom-bust cycle (pre-World War II vintage), in the booms
the money supply went up, prices in general therefore went up, but the
prices of capital goods rose by *more* than consumer goods, drawing
resources out of consumer and into capital goods industries. In short,
abstracting from general price increases, *relative to each other,*
capital goods prices rose and consumer prices *fell* in the boom. What
happened in the bust? The opposite situation: the money supply went
down, prices in general therefore fell, but the prices of capital goods
fell by *more* than consumer goods, drawing resources back out of
capital goods into consumer goods industries. In short, abstracting from
general price declines, *relative to each other*, capital goods prices
*fell* and consumer prices *rose* during the bust.

The Austrian point is that this scenario in relative prices in boom and
bust is *still* taking place unchanged. During the booms, capital goods
prices still rise and consumer goods prices still fall relative to each
other, and vice versa during the recession. The difference is that a new
monetary world has arrived, as we have indicated earlier in this
chapter. For now that the gold standard has been eliminated, the Fed can
and does increase the money supply *all the time*, whether it be boom or
recession. There hasn’t been a contraction of the money supply since the
early 1930s, and there is not likely to be another in the foreseeable
future. So now that the money supply *always* increases, prices in
general are *always* going up, sometimes more slowly, sometimes more
rapidly.

In short, in the classic recession, consumer goods prices were always
going up relative to capital goods. Thus, if consumer goods prices fell
by 10 percent in a particular recession, and capital goods prices fell
by 30 percent, consumer prices were *rising* substantially in relative
terms. But, from the point of view of the consumer, the fall in the cost
of living was highly welcome, and indeed was the blessed sugarcoating on
the pill of recession or depression. Even in the Great Depression of the
1930s, with very high rates of unemployment, the 75–80 percent of the
labor force still employed enjoyed bargain prices for their consumer
goods.

But now, with Keynesian fine-tuning at work, the sugarcoating has been
removed from the pill. Now that the supply of money—and hence general
prices—is *never* allowed to fall, the rise in relative consumer goods
prices during a recession will hit the consumer as a visible rise in
nominal prices as well. His cost of living now goes up in a depression,
and so he reaps the worst of both worlds; in the classical business
cycle, before the rule of Keynes and the Council of Economic Advisors,
he at least had to suffer only one calamity at a time.

What then are the policy conclusions that arise rapidly and easily from
the Austrian analysis of the business cycle? They are the precise
opposite from those of the Keynesian establishment. For, since the virus
of distortion of production and prices stems from inflationary bank
credit expansion, the Austrian prescription for the business cycle will
be: First, if we are in a boom period, the government and its banks must
cease inflating immediately. It is true that this cessation of
artificial stimulant will inevitably bring the inflationary boom to an
end, and will inaugurate the inevitable recession or depression. But the
longer the government delays this process, the harsher the necessary
readjustments will have to be. For the sooner the depression
readjustment is gotten over with, the better. This also means that the
government must never try to delay the depression process; the
depression must be allowed to work itself out as quickly as possible, so
that real recovery can begin. This means, too, that the government must
particularly avoid any of the interventions so dear to Keynesian hearts.
It must never try to prop up unsound business situations; it must never
bail out or lend money to business firms in trouble. For doing so will
simply prolong the agony and convert a sharp and quick depression phase
into a lingering and chronic disease. The government must never try to
prop up wage rates or prices, especially in the capital goods
industries; doing so will prolong and delay indefinitely the completion
of the depression adjustment process. It will also cause indefinite and
prolonged depression and mass unemployment in the vital capital goods
industries. The government must not try to inflate again in order to get
out of the depression. For even if this reinflation succeeds (which is
by no means assured), it will only sow greater trouble and more
prolonged and renewed depression later on. The government must do
nothing to encourage consumption, and it must not increase its own
expenditures, for this will further increase the social
consumption/investment ratio—when the only thing that could speed up the
adjustment process is to lower the consumption/savings ratio so that
more of the currently unsound investments will become validated and
become economic. The only way the government can aid in this process is
to lower its own budget, which will increase the ratio of investment to
consumption in the economy (since government spending may be regarded as
consumption spending for bureaucrats and politicians).

Thus, what the government should do, according to the Austrian analysis
of the depression and the business cycle, is absolutely nothing. It
should stop its *own* inflating, and then it should maintain a strict
hands-off, laissez-faire policy. Anything it does will delay and
obstruct the adjustment processes of the market; the less it does, the
more rapidly will the market adjustment process do its work and sound
economic recovery ensue.

The Austrian prescription for a depression is thus the diametric
opposite of the Keynesian: it is for the government to keep absolute
hands off the economy, and to confine itself to stopping its own
inflation, and to cutting its own budget.

It should be clear that the Austrian analysis of the business cycle
meshes handsomely with the libertarian outlook toward government and a
free economy. Since the State would always like to inflate and to
interfere in the economy, a libertarian prescription would stress the
importance of absolute separation of money and banking from the State.
This would involve, at the very least, the abolition of the Federal
Reserve System and the return to a commodity money (e.g., gold or
silver) so that the money-unit would once again be a unit of weight of a
market-produced commodity rather than the name of a piece of paper
printed by the State’s counterfeiting apparatus.

