# 5 INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE [12-chap05.html#page97]

If there is anything a libertarian must be squarely and totally against,
it is *involuntary servitude*—forced labor—an act which denies the most
elemental right of self-ownership. “Liberty” and “slavery” have ever
been recognized to be polar opposites. The libertarian, therefore, is
totally opposed to slavery.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn1)^ An academic
question nowadays, one might object? But is it really? For what *is*
slavery but (a) forcing people to work at tasks the slavemaster wishes,
and (b) paying them either pure subsistence or, at any rate, less than
the slave would have accepted voluntarily. In short, forced labor at
below free-market wages.

Thus, are we really free of “slavery,” of involuntary servitude in
present-day America? Is the prohibition against involuntary servitude of
the Thirteenth Amendment really being
obeyed?^[2](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn2)^

## CONSCRIPTION [12-chap05.html#page98]

Surely, for one example, there can be no more blatant case of
involuntary servitude than our entire system of *conscription*. Every
youth is forced to register with the selective service system when he
turns eighteen. He is compelled to carry his draft card at all times,
and, at whatever time the federal government deems fit, he is seized by
the authorities and inducted into the armed forces. There his body and
will are no longer his own; he is subject to the dictates of the
government; and he can be forced to kill and to place his own life in
jeopardy if the authorities so decree. What else is involuntary
servitude if not the draft?

The utilitarian aspect permeates the argument for the conscription
system. Thus the government uses the argument: *Who* will defend us
against foreign attack if we do not employ coercion and conscript our
defenders? There are several rebuttals for a libertarian to make to this
line of reasoning. In the first place, if you and I and our next-door
neighbor think that we need defending, we have no moral right to use
coercion—the bayonet or the revolver—to force someone else to defend us.
This act of conscripting is just as much a deed of unjustifiable
aggression—of kidnapping and possibly murder—as the alleged aggression
we are trying to guard ourselves against in the first place. If we add
that the draftees owe their bodies and their lives, if necessary, to
“society” or to “their country,” then we must retort: *Who is* this
“society” or this “country” that is being used as a talisman to justify
enslavement? It is simply all individuals in the territorial area
*except* the youths being conscripted. “Society” and “country” are in
this case mythical abstractions that are being used to cloak the naked
use of coercion to promote the interests of specific individuals.

Secondly, to move to the utilitarian plane, *why* is it considered
necessary to conscript defenders? No one is conscripted on the free
market, yet on that market people obtain, through voluntary purchase and
sale, every conceivable manner of goods and services, even the most
necessary ones. On the market, people can and do obtain food, shelter,
clothing, medical care, etc. Why can’t they hire defenders as well?
Indeed, there are plenty of people being hired every day to perform
dangerous services: forest firefighters, rangers, test pilots, and...
police and private guards and watchmen. Why can’t soldiers be hired in
the same way?

Or, to put it another way, the government employs countless thousands of
people for all sorts of services, from truck drivers to scientists to
typists; how is it that none of these people have to be conscripted? Why
is there no “shortage” of these occupations to supposedly force the
government to resort to compulsion to obtain them? To go a step further,
even within the army there is no “shortage” of officers and no need to
draft them; no one conscripts generals or admirals. The answer to these
questions is simple: there is no shortage of government typists because
the government goes out on the market and hires them at the market wage;
there is no shortage of generals because they are paid handsomely, in
salaries, perquisites, and pensions. There *is* a shortage of buck
privates because their pay is—or was, until very recently—abysmally
below the market wage. For years, even including the monetary value of
the free food, shelter, and other services supplied the GIs, the
earnings of the buck private were something like one-half the salary he
could have earned in civilian life. Is it any wonder that there has been
a chronic shortage of enlistees? For years it has been known that the
way to induce people to volunteer for hazardous jobs is to pay them
extra as a compensation. But the government has been paying the men half
of what they could earn in private life.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn3)^

There is also the special disgrace of the doctors’ draft, in which
physicians are subject to the draft at ages far beyond anyone else. Are
doctors, then, to be penalized for their entry into the profession of
medicine? What is the moral justification for onerous burdens placed on
this particular, and vitally important, profession? Is this the way to
cure the shortage of doctors—to put every man on notice that if he
becomes a physician he will be sure to be drafted, and at a specially
late age? Once again, the armed forces’ need for doctors could easily be
satisfied if the government were willing to pay physicians the market
salary, plus enough to compensate them for the hazardous labor. If the
government wishes to hire nuclear physicists or “think-tank”
strategists, it finds ways of doing so at extremely handsome salaries.
Are doctors lower forms of humanity?

## THE ARMY [the-army]

While conscription into the armed forces is a blatant and aggravated
form of involuntary servitude, there is another, far more subtle and
therefore less detectable form: the structure of the army itself.
Consider this: in what other occupation in the country are there severe
penalties, including prison and in some cases execution, for
“desertion,” i.e., for quitting the particular employment? If someone
quits General Motors, is he shot at sunrise?

It might be objected that, in the case of enlistees, the soldier or
officer has voluntarily agreed to serve for a certain term, and he is
therefore obligated to continue in service for that term of years. But
the whole concept of “term of service” is part of the problem. Suppose,
for example, that an engineer signs a contract with ARAMCO to serve for
three years in Saudi Arabia. After a few months he decides that the life
is not for him and he quits. This may well be a *moral* default on his
part—a breach of moral obligation. But is it a legally enforceable
obligation? In short, can he or should he be forced by the monopoly of
weaponry of government to keep working for the remainder of his term? If
so, that would be forced labor and enslavement. For while it is true
that he made a promise of future work, his body continues, in a free
society, to be owned by himself alone. In practice and in libertarian
theory as well, then, the engineer might be morally criticized for the
breach, he may be blacklisted by other oil firms, he may be forced to
return any advance pay tendered to him by the company, but he will *not*
be enslaved to ARAMCO for the three-year period.

But if this is true of ARAMCO, or of any other occupation or job in
private life, why should it be different in the army? If a man signs up
for seven years and then quits, he should be allowed to leave. He will
lose pension rights, he will be morally criticized, he may be
blacklisted from similar occupations, but he cannot, as a self-owner, be
enslaved against his will.

It may be protested that the armed forces is a peculiarly important
occupation that needs this sort of coercive sanction that other jobs do
not have. Setting aside the importance of such occupations as medicine,
agriculture and transportation that need not resort to such methods, let
us consider a comparable defense occupation in civilian life—the police.
Surely the police perform an equally, and perhaps more vital,
service—and yet every year people join the police and quit the force,
and there is no coercive attempt to bind their labor through years of
enlistment. In addition to demanding the end of conscription, then, the
libertarian also proposes to do away with the entire concept of a *term*
of enlistment and the practice of slavery this implies. Let the armed
forces operate in ways similar to police, firemen, rangers, private
guards, etc.—free of the blight and the moral crime of involuntary
servitude.

But there is more to be said about the army as an institution, even if
it were made completely voluntary. Americans have almost totally
forgotten one of the noblest and strongest elements in the original
American heritage: determined opposition to the entire institution of a
“standing army.” A government that has a permanent standing army at its
disposal will always be tempted to use it, and to use it in an
aggressive, interventionist, and warlike manner. While foreign policy
will be dealt with below, it is clear that a permanent army is a
standing temptation to the State to enlarge its power, to push around
other people as well as other countries, and to dominate the internal
life of the nation. The original aim of the Jeffersonian movement—a
largely libertarian factor in American political life—was to abolish the
standing army and navy altogether. The original American principle was
that if the nation was attacked, then the citizens would hasten to join
to repell the invader. A standing armed force, then, could only lead to
trouble and to the aggrandizement of State power. In the course of his
trenchant and prophetic attack on the proposed Constitution in the
Virginia ratifying convention, Patrick Henry warned of a standing army:
“Congress, by the power of taxation, by that of raising an army, and by
their control over the militia, have the sword in one hand, and the
purse in the other. Shall we be safe without
either?”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn4)^

Any standing army, then, poses a standing threat to liberty. Its
monopoly of coercive weapons, its modern tendency toward creating and
supporting a “military-industrial complex” to supply that army, and
last, but not least, as Patrick Henry notes, the taxing power to finance
that army, pose a continuing threat of the army’s perpetual expansion in
size and power. *Any* tax-supported institution, of course, is opposed
by the libertarian as coercive, but an army is uniquely menacing for its
amassing and collecting into one set of hands the massive power of
modern weaponry.

## ANTI-STRIKE LAWS [anti-strike-laws]

On October 4, 1971, President Nixon invoked the Taft-Hartley Act to
obtain a court injunction forcing the suspension of a dock strike for 80
days; this was the ninth time the federal government had used the Act in
a dock strike. Months earlier, the head of the New York City teachers’
union went to jail for several days for defying a law prohibiting public
employees from striking. It is no doubt convenient for a long-suffering
public to be spared the disruptions of a strike. Yet the “solution”
imposed was forced labor, pure and simple; the workers were coerced,
against their will, into going back to work. There is no moral excuse,
in a society claiming to be opposed to slavery and in a country which
has outlawed involuntary servitude, for any legal or judicial action
prohibiting strikes—or jailing union leaders who fail to comply. Slavery
is all too often more convenient for the slavemasters.

It is true that the strike is a peculiar form of work stoppage. The
strikers do not merely quit their jobs; they also assert that somehow,
in some metaphysical sense, they still “own” their jobs and are entitled
to them, and intend to return to them when the issues are resolved. But
the remedy for this self-contradictory policy, as well as for the
disruptive power of labor unions, is not to pass laws outlawing strikes;
the remedy is to remove the substantial body of law, federal, state, and
local, that confers special governmental privileges on labor unions. All
that is needed, both for libertarian principle and for a healthy
economy, is to remove and abolish these special privileges.

These privileges have been enshrined in federal law—especially in the
Wagner-Taft-Hartley Act, passed originally in 1935, and the
Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1931. The latter prohibits the courts from
issuing injunctions in cases of imminent union violence; the former
compels employers to bargain “in good faith” with any union that wins
the votes of the majority of a work unit arbitrarily defined by the
federal government—and also prohibits employers from discriminating
against union organizers. It was only after the Wagner Act—and its
predecessor, the NIRA in 1933—that labor unions were able to become a
powerful force in American life. It was then that unions skyrocketed
from something like five percent to over twenty percent of the labor
force. Furthermore, local and state laws often protect unions from being
sued, and they place restrictions on the employers’ hiring of
strikebreaking labor; and police are often instructed not to interfere
in the use of violence against strikebreakers by union pickets. Take
away these special privileges and immunities, and labor unions would
sink back to their previous negligible role in the American economy.

It is characteristic of our statist trend that, when general indignation
against unions led to the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947, the government did
not repeal any of these special privileges. Instead, it added special
restrictions upon unions to limit the power which the government itself
had created. Given a choice, the natural tendency of the State is to add
to its power, not to cut it down; and so we have the peculiar situation
of the government first building up unions and then howling for
restrictions against their power. This is reminiscent of the American
farm programs, in which one branch of the Department of Agriculture pays
farmers to *restrict* their production, while another branch of the same
agency pays them to increase their productivity. Irrational, surely,
from the point of view of the consumers and the taxpayers, but perfectly
rational from the point of view of the subsidized farmers *and* of the
growing power of the bureaucracy. Similarly, the government’s seemingly
contradictory policy on unions serves, first, to aggrandize the power of
government over labor relations, and second, to foster a suitably
integrated and Establishment-minded unionism as junior partner in
government’s role over the economy.

## THE TAX SYSTEM [the-tax-system]

In a sense, the entire system of taxation is a form of involuntary
servitude. Take, in particular, the *income tax.* The high levels of
income tax mean that all of us work a large part of the year—several
months—for *nothing* for Uncle Sam before being allowed to enjoy our
incomes on the market. Part of the essence of slavery, after all, is
forced work for someone at little or no pay. But the income tax means
that we sweat and earn income, only to see the government extract a
large chunk of it by coercion for its own purposes. What is this but
forced labor at no pay?

The *withholding* feature of the income tax is a still more clear-cut
instance of involuntary servitude. For as the intrepid Connecticut
industrialist Vivien Kellems argued years ago, the employer is forced to
expend time, labor, and money in the business of deducting and
transmitting his employees’ taxes to the federal and state
governments—yet the employer is not recompensed for this expenditure.
What moral principle justifies the government’s forcing employers to act
as its unpaid tax collectors?

The withholding principle, of course, is the linchpin of the whole
federal income tax system. Without the steady and relatively painless
process of deducting the tax from the worker’s paycheck, the government
could never hope to raise the high levels of tax from the workers in one
lump sum. Few people remember that the withholding system was only
instituted during World War II and was supposed to be a wartime
expedient. Like so many other features of State despotism, however, the
wartime emergency measure soon became a hallowed part of the American
system.

It is perhaps significant that the federal government, challenged by
Vivien Kellems to test the constitutionality of the withholding system,
failed to take up the challenge. In February 1948 Miss Kellems, a small
manufacturer in Westport, Connecticut, announced that she was defying
the withholding law and was refusing to deduct the tax from her
employees. She demanded that the federal government indict her, so that
the courts would be able to rule on the constitutionality of the
withholding system. The government refused to do so, but instead seized
the amount due from her bank account. Miss Kellems then sued in federal
court for the government to return her funds. When the suit finally came
to trial in February 1951, the jury ordered the government to refund her
money. But the test of constitutionality never
came.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn5)^

To add insult to injury, the individual taxpayer, in filling out his tax
form, is also forced by the government to work at no pay on the
laborious and thankless task of reckoning how much he owes the
government. Here again, he cannot charge the government for the cost and
labor expended in making out his return. Furthermore, the law requiring
everyone to fill out his tax form is a clear violation of the Fifth
Amendment of the Constitution, prohibiting the government from forcing
anyone to incriminate himself. Yet the courts, often zealous in
protecting Fifth Amendment rights in less sensitive areas, have done
nothing here, in a case where the entire existence of the swollen
federal government structure is at stake. The repeal of either the
income tax or the withholding or self-incriminating provisions would
force the government back to the relatively minor levels of power that
the country enjoyed before the twentieth century.

*Retail* sales, excise, and admission taxes also compel unpaid labor—in
these cases, the unpaid labor of the retailer in collecting and
forwarding the taxes to the government.

The high costs of tax collecting for the government have another
unfortunate effect—perhaps not unintended by the powers-that-be. These
costs, readily undertaken by large businesses, impose a
disproportionately heavy and often crippling cost upon the small
employer. The large employer can then cheerfully shoulder the cost
knowing that his small competitor bears far more of the burden.

## THE COURTS [the-courts]

Compulsory labor permeates our legal and judicial structure. Thus, much
venerated judicial procedure rests upon *coerced testimony*. Since it is
axiomatic to libertarianism that all coercion—in this case, all coerced
labor—against everyone except convicted criminals be eliminated, this
means that compulsory testimony must be abolished as well. In recent
years, it is true, the courts have been alive to the Fifth Amendment
protection that no alleged criminal be forced to testify against
himself— to provide the material for his own conviction. The
legislatures have been significantly weakening this protection by
passing immunity laws, offering immunity from prosecution if someone
will testify against his fellows—and, furthermore, compelling the
witness to accept the offer and testify against his associates. But
compelling testimony from anyone for any reason is forced labor—and,
furthermore, is akin to kidnapping, since the person is forced to appear
at the hearing or trial and is then forced to perform the labor of
giving testimony. The problem is not only the recent immunity laws; the
problem is to eliminate *all* coerced testimony, including the universal
subpoenaing of witnesses to a crime, and then forcing them to testify.
In the case of witnesses, there is no question whatever of their being
guilty of a crime, so the use of compulsion against them—a use that no
one has questioned until now—has even less justification than compelling
testimony from accused criminals.

In fact, the entire power to *subpoena* should be abolished, because the
*subpoena* power compels attendance at a trial. Even the accused
criminal or tortfeasor should not be forced to attend his own trial,
since he has not yet been convicted. If he is indeed—according to the
excellent and libertarian principle of Anglo-Saxon law—innocent until
proved guilty, then the courts have no right to compel the defendant to
attend his trial. For remember, the *only* exemption to the Thirteenth
Amendment’s prohibition of involuntary servitude is “except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted”;
an accused party has not yet been convicted. The most the court should
be able to do, then, is to notify the defendant that he is going to be
tried, and *invite* him or his lawyer to attend; otherwise, if they
choose not to, the trial will proceed *in absentia*. Then, of course,
the defendant will not enjoy the best presentation of his case.

Both the Thirteenth Amendment and the libertarian creed make the
exception for the convicted criminal. The libertarian believes that a
criminal loses his rights to the extent that he has aggressed upon the
rights of another, and therefore that it is permissible to incarcerate
the convicted criminal and subject him to involuntary servitude to that
degree. In the libertarian world, however, the *purpose* of imprisonment
and punishment will undoubtedly be different; there will be no “district
attorney” who presumes to try a case on behalf of a nonexistent
“society,” and then punishes the criminal on “society’s” behalf. In that
world the prosecutor will always represent the *individual victim*, and
punishment will be exacted to redound to the benefit of that victim.
Thus, a crucial focus of punishment will be to force the criminal to
repay, make restitution to, the victim. One such model was a practice in
colonial America. Instead of incarcerating, say, a man who had robbed a
farmer in the district, the criminal was coercively indentured out to
the farmer—in effect, “enslaved” for a term—there to work for the farmer
until his debt was repaid. Indeed, during the Middle Ages, restitution
to the victim was the dominant concept of punishment; only as the State
grew more powerful did the governmental authorities—the kings and the
barons—encroach more and more into the compensation process,
increasingly confiscating more of the criminal’s property for themselves
and neglecting the hapless victim. And as the emphasis shifted from
restitution to punishment for abstract crimes “committed against the
State,” the punishments exacted by the State upon the wrongdoer became
more severe.

As Professor Schafer writes, “As the state monopolized the institution
of punishment, so the rights of the injured were slowly separated from
penal law.” Or, in the words of the turn-of-the-century criminologist
William Tallack, “It was chiefly owing to the violent greed of feudal
barons and medieval ecclesiastical powers that the rights of the injured
party were gradually infringed upon, and finally, to a large extent,
appropriated by these authorities, who exacted a double vengeance,
indeed, upon the offender, by forfeiting his property to themselves
instead of to his victim, and then punishing him by the dungeon, the
torture, the stake or the gibbet. But the original victim of wrong was
practically ignored.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn6)^

At any rate, while the libertarian does not object to prisons *per se*,
he does balk at several practices common to the present judicial and
penal system. One is the lengthy jail term imposed upon the defendant
while awaiting trial. The constitutional right to a “speedy trial” is
not arbitrary but a way of minimizing the length of involuntary
servitude *before* conviction for a crime. In fact, except in those
cases where the criminal has been caught red-handed and where a certain
presumption of guilt therefore exists, it is impossible to justify *any*
imprisonment before conviction, let alone before trial. And even when
someone is caught red-handed, there is an important reform that needs to
be instituted to keep the system honest: subjecting the police and the
other authorities to the same law as everyone else. As will be discussed
further below, if everyone is supposed to be subject to the same
criminal law, then exempting the authorities from that law gives them a
legal license to commit continual aggression. The policeman who
apprehends a criminal and arrests him, and the judicial and penal
authorities who incarcerate him before trial and conviction—all should
be subject to the universal law. In short, if they have committed an
error and the defendant turns out to be innocent, then these authorities
should be subjected to the same penalties as anyone else who kidnaps and
incarcerates an innocent man. Immunity in pursuit of their trade should
no more serve as an excuse than Lieutenant Calley was excused for
committing atrocities at My Lai in the course of the Vietnam
war.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn7)^

The granting of *bail* is a halfhearted attempt to ease the problem of
incarceration before trial, but it is clear that the practice of bail
discriminates against the poor. The discrimination persists even though
the rise of the business of bail-bonding has permitted many more people
to raise bail. The rebuttal that the courts are clogged with cases and
therefore cannot grant a speedy trial is, of course, no defense of the
system; on the contrary, this built-in inefficiency is an excellent
argument for the abolition of government courts.

Furthermore, the setting of bail is arbitrarily in the hands of the
judge, who has excessive and little-checked power to incarcerate people
before they are convicted. This is particularly menacing in the case of
citations for *contempt of court*, because judges have almost unlimited
power to slap someone into prison, after the judge himself has acted as
a one-man prosecutor, judge, and jury in accusing, “convicting,” and
sentencing the culprit completely free from the ordinary rules of
evidence and trial, and in violation of the fundamental legal principle
of not being a judge in one’s own case.

Finally, there is another cornerstone of the judicial system which has
unaccountably gone unchallenged, even by libertarians, for far too long.
This is *compulsory jury service*. There is little difference in kind,
though obviously a great difference in degree, between compulsory jury
duty and conscription; both are enslavement, both compel the individual
to perform tasks on the State’s behalf and at the State’s bidding. And
both are a function of pay at slave wages. Just as the shortage of
voluntary enlistees in the army is a function of a pay scale far below
the market wage, so the abysmally low pay for jury service insures that,
even if jury “enlistments” were possible, not many would be forthcoming.
Furthermore, not only are jurors coerced into attending and serving on
juries, but sometimes they are locked behind closed doors for many
weeks, and prohibited from reading newspapers. What is this but prison
and involuntary servitude for noncriminals?

It will be objected that jury service is a highly important civic
function, and insures a fair trial which a defendant may not obtain from
the judge, especially since the judge is part of the State system and
therefore liable to be partial to the prosecutor’s case. Very true, but
precisely because the service is so vital, it is particularly important
that it be performed by people who do it gladly, and voluntarily. Have
we forgotten that free labor is happier and more efficient than slave
labor? The abolition of jury-slavery should be a vital plank in any
libertarian platform. The judges are not conscripted; neither are the
opposing lawyers; and neither should the jurors.

It is perhaps not a coincidence that, throughout the United States,
lawyers are everywhere exempt from jury service. Since it is almost
always lawyers who write the laws, can we detect class legislation and
class privilege at work?

## COMPULSORY COMMITMENT [12-chap05.html#page111]

One of the most shameful areas of involuntary servitude in our society
is the widespread practice of compulsory commitment, or involuntary
hospitalization, of mental patients. In former generations this
incarceration of noncriminals was frankly carried out as a measure
against mental patients, to remove them from society. The practice of
twentieth-century liberalism has been superficially more humane, but
actually far more insidious: now physicians and psychiatrists help
incarcerate these unfortunates “for their own good.” The humanitarian
rhetoric has permitted a far more widespread use of the practice and,
for one thing, has allowed disgruntled relatives to put away their loved
ones without suffering a guilty conscience.

In the last decade, the libertarian psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Dr.
Thomas S. Szasz has carried on a one-man crusade, at first seemingly
hopeless but now increasingly influential in the psychiatric field,
against compulsory commitment. In numerous books and articles, Dr. Szasz
has delivered a comprehensive and systematic attack on this practice. He
has insisted, for example, that involuntary commitment is a profound
violation of medical ethics. Instead of serving the patient, the
physician here serves others—the family, the State—to act against, and
tyrannize over completely, the person he is supposed to be helping.
Compulsory commitment and compulsory “therapy,” moreover, are far more
likely to aggravate and perpetuate “mental illness” than to cure it. All
too often, Szasz points out, commitment is a device for incarcerating
and thereby disposing of disagreeable relatives rather than a genuine
aid to the patient.

The guiding rationale for compulsory commitment is that the patient
might well be “dangerous to himself or to others.” The first grave flaw
in this approach is that the police, or the law, is stepping in, *not*
when an overt aggressive act is in the process of occurring, but on
someone’s judgment that such an act *might* someday take place. But this
provides an open sesame for unlimited tyranny. Anyone might be adjudged
to be capable of or likely to commit a crime someday, and therefore on
such grounds anyone may legitimately be locked up—not for a crime, but
because someone *thinks* he *might* commit one. This sort of thinking
justifies not only incarceration, but *permanent* incarceration, of
*anyone* under suspicion. But the fundamental libertarian creed holds
that every individual is capable of free will and free choice; that no
one, however likely to commit a crime in the future based on a
statistical or any other judgment, is inevitably determined to do so;
and that, in any case, it is immoral, and itself invasive and criminal,
to coerce anyone who is not an *overt* and present, rather than a
suspected, criminal.

Recently Dr. Szasz was asked, “But don’t you think that society has the
right and the duty to care for those individuals adjudged to be
‘dangerous to themselves and others’?” Szasz cogently replied:

> I think the idea of “helping” people by imprisoning them and doing
> terrible things to them is a religious concept, as the idea of
> “saving” witches by torture and burning once was. As far as
> “dangerousness to self” is concerned, I believe, as did John Stuart
> Mill, that a man’s body and soul are his own, not the state’s. And
> furthermore, that each individual has the “right,” if you will, to do
> with his body as he pleases—so long as he doesn’t harm anyone else, or
> infringe on someone else’s right.
>
> As far as “dangerousness to others” goes, most psychiatrists working
> with hospitalized patients would admit this is pure fantasy. ... There
> have in fact been statistical studies made which show that mental
> patients are much more law-abiding than the normal population.

And civil liberties lawyer Bruce Ennis adds that:

> We know that 85 percent of all ex-convicts will commit more crimes in
> the future and that ghetto residents and teen-age males are far more
> likely to commit crime than the average member of the population. We
> also know, from recent studies, that mental patients are statistically
> *less* dangerous than the average guy. So if what we’re really worried
> about is danger, why don’t we, first, lock up all former convicts, and
> then lock up all ghetto residents, and then why don’t we lock up all
> teen-age males? ... The question Szasz has been asking is: If a person
> hasn’t broken a law, what right has society to lock him
> up?^[8](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn8)^

The involuntarily committed may be divided into two classes: those who
have committed no crime, and those who have. For the former, the
libertarian calls unconditionally for their release. But what of the
latter, what of criminals who, through insanity or other pleas,
supposedly escape the “brutality” of prison punishment and instead
receive medical care at the hands of the State? Here again, Dr. Szasz
has pioneered in a vigorous and devastating critique of the despotism of
liberal “humanitarianism.” First, it is grotesque to claim that
incarceration in a state mental hospital is somehow “more humane” than
equivalent incarceration in prison. On the contrary, the despotism of
the authorities is likely to be more severe, and the prisoner is likely
to have far less recourse in defense of his rights, for as someone
certified as “mentally ill” he is placed into the category of a
“nonperson” whom no one feels obliged to take seriously any longer. As
Dr. Szasz has jocularly said: “Being in a state mental hospital would
drive anyone crazy!”

But furthermore, we must question the entire notion of taking *anyone*
out from under the rule of objective law. To do so is far more likely to
be damaging than helpful to the people thus singled out. Suppose, for
example, that two men, *A* and *B*, commit an equivalent robbery, and
that the usual punishment for this crime is five years in prison.
Suppose that *B* “gets off” this punishment by being declared mentally
ill, and is transferred to a state mental institution. The liberal
focuses on the possibility, say, that *B* may be released in two years
by the State psychiatrist through being adjudged “cured” or
“rehabilitated.” But what if the psychiatrist *never* considers him
cured, or does so only after a very long time? Then *B*, for the simple
crime of theft, may face the horror of lifelong incarceration in a
mental institution. Hence, the “liberal” concept of *indeterminate
sentence*—of sentencing someone not for his objective crime but on the
State’s judgment of his psyche or spirit of cooperation—constitutes
tyranny and dehumanization in its worst form. It is a tyranny,
furthermore, which encourages the prisoner into deceptive behavior to
try to fool the State psychiatrist—whom he perceives quite correctly as
his enemy—into thinking that he is “cured” so that he can get out of
this incarceration. To call this process “therapy” or “rehabilitation”
is surely cruel mockery of these terms. It is far more principled, as
well as more truly humane, to treat every prisoner in accordance with
objective criminal law.

