# 6 PERSONAL LIBERTY [13-chap06.html#page115]

## FREEDOM OF SPEECH [freedom-of-speech]

There are, of course, many problems of personal liberty which cannot be
subsumed under the category of “involuntary servitude.” Freedom of
speech and press have long been treasured by those who confine
themselves to being “civil libertarians”—”civil” meaning that economic
freedom and the rights of private property are left out of the equation.
But we have already seen that “freedom of speech” cannot be upheld as an
absolute except as it is subsumed under the general rights of property
of the individual (emphatically *including* property right in his own
person). Thus, the man who shouts “fire” in a crowded theater has no
right to do so because he is aggressing against the contractual property
rights of the theater owner and of the patrons of the performance.

Aside from invasions of property, however, freedom of speech will
necessarily be upheld to the uttermost by every libertarian. Freedom to
say, print, and sell any utterance becomes an absolute right, in
whatever area the speech or expression chooses to cover. Here, civil
libertarians have a generally good record, and in the judiciary the late
Justice Hugo Black was particularly notable in defending freedom of
speech from government restriction on the basis of the First Amendment
of the Constitution.

But there are areas in which even the most ardent civil libertarians
have been unfortunately fuzzy. What, for example, of “incitement to
riot,” in which the speaker is held guilty of a crime for whipping up a
mob, which then riots and commits various actions and crimes against
person and property? In our view, “incitement” can only be considered a
crime if we deny every man’s freedom of will and of choice, and assume
that if *A* tells *B* and *C*: “You and him go ahead and riot!” that
somehow *B* and *C* are then helplessly determined to proceed and commit
the wrongful act. But the libertarian, who believes in freedom of the
will, must insist that while it might be immoral or unfortunate for *A*
to advocate a riot, that this is strictly in the realm of advocacy and
should not be subject to legal penalty. Of course, if *A* also
participates in the riot, then he himself becomes a rioter and is
equally subject to punishment. Furthermore, if *A* is a boss in a
criminal enterprise, and, as part of the crime, orders his henchmen:
“You and him go and rob such and such a bank,” then of course *A,*
according to the law of accessories, becomes a participant or even
leader in the criminal enterprise itself.

If advocacy should never be a crime, then neither should “conspiracy to
advocate,” for, in contrast to the unfortunate development of conspiracy
law, “conspiring” (i.e., agreeing) to do something should never be more
illegal than the act itself. (How, in fact, can “conspiracy” be defined
except as an agreement by two or more people to do something that you,
the definer, do not like?)^[1](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn1)^

Another difficult zone is the law of libel and slander. It has generally
been held legitimate to restrict freedom of speech if that speech has
the effect of either falsely or maliciously damaging the reputation of
another person. What the law of libel and slander does, in short, is to
argue a “property right” of someone in his own reputation. Yet someone’s
“reputation” is not and cannot be “owned” by him, since it is purely a
function of the subjective feelings and attitudes held by other people.
But since no one can ever truly “own the mind and attitude of another,
this means that no one can literally have a property right in his
“reputation.” A person’s reputation fluctuates all the time, in
accordance with the attitudes and opinions of the rest of the
population. Hence, speech attacking someone cannot be an invasion of his
property right and therefore should not be subject to restriction or
legal penalty.

It is, of course, immoral to level false charges against another person,
but once again, the *moral* and the *legal* are, for the libertarian,
two very different categories.

Furthermore, pragmatically, if there were no laws of libel or slander,
people would be much less willing to credit charges without full
documentation than they are now. Nowadays, if a man is charged with some
flaw or misdeed, the general reaction is to believe it, since if the
charge were false, “Why doesn’t he sue for libel?” The law of libel, of
course, discriminates in this way against the poor, since a person with
few financial resources is scarcely as ready to carry on a costly libel
suit as a person of affluent means. Furthermore, wealthy people can now
use the libel laws as a club against poorer persons, restricting
perfectly legitimate charges and utterances under the threat of suing
their poorer enemies for libel. Paradoxically, then, a person of limited
resources is more apt to suffer from libel—and to have his own speech
restricted—in the present system than he would in a world without any
laws against libel or defamation.

Fortunately, in recent years the laws against libel have been
progressively weakened, so that one can now deliver vigorous and
trenchant criticisms of public officials and of people in the public eye
without fear of being subject to costly legal action or legal
punishment.

Another action that should be completely free of restriction is the
boycott. In a boycott, one or more people use their right of speech to
urge, for whatever reasons—important or trivial—that other people cease
to buy someone else’s product. If, for example, several people organize
a campaign—for whatever reason—to urge consumers to stop buying XYZ
Beer, this is again purely advocacy, and, furthermore, advocacy of a
perfectly legitimate act—*not* purchasing the beer. A successful boycott
might be unfortunate for the producers of XYZ Beer, but this, again, is
strictly within the realm of free speech and the rights of private
property. The makers of XYZ Beer take their chances with the free
choices of consumers, and consumers are entitled to listen and to be
swayed by anyone they choose. Yet our labor laws have infringed upon the
right of labor unions to organize boycotts against business firms. It is
also illegal, under our banking laws, to spread rumors about the
insolvency of a bank—an obvious case of the government’s extending
special privileges to banks by outlawing freedom of speech in opposition
to their use.

A particularly thorny question is the whole matter of picketing and
demonstrations. Freedom of speech implies, of course, freedom of
assembly—the freedom to gather together and express oneself in concert
with others. But the situation becomes more complex when the use of the
*streets* is involved. It is clear that picketing is illegitimate when
it is used—as it often is—to block access to a private building or
factory, or when the pickets threaten violence against those who cross
the picket line. It is also clear that sit-ins are an illegitimate
invasion of private property. But even “peaceful picketing” is not
clearly legitimate, for it is part of a wider problem: Who decides on
the use of the streets? The problem stems from the fact that the streets
are almost universally owned by (local) government. But the government,
not being a private owner, lacks any criterion for allocating the use of
its streets, so that any decision it makes will be arbitrary.

Suppose, for example, that the Friends of Wisteria wish to demonstrate
and parade on behalf of Wisteria in a public street. The police ban the
demonstration, claiming that it will clog the streets and disrupt
traffic. Civil libertarians will automatically protest and claim that
the “right of free speech” of the Wisteria demonstrators is being
unjustly abridged. But the police, too, may have a perfectly legitimate
point: the streets may well be clogged, and it is the government’s
responsibility to maintain the flow of traffic. How then decide?
Whichever way the government decides, *some* group of taxpayers will be
injured by the decision. If the government decides to allow the
demonstration, the motorists or pedestrians will be injured; if it does
not, then the Friends of Wisteria will suffer a loss. In either case,
the very fact of government decision-making generates inevitable
conflict over who shall, and who shall not among the taxpayers and
citizens, use the governmental resource.

It is only the universal fact of government ownership and control of the
streets that makes this problem insoluble and cloaks the true solution
to it. The point is that *whoever* owns a resource will decide on how
that resource is to be used. The owner of a press will decide what will
be printed on that press. And the owner of the streets will decide how
to allocate their use. In short, if the streets were privately owned and
the Friends of Wisteria asked for the use of Fifth Avenue to
demonstrate, it will be up to the owner of Fifth Avenue to decide
whether to rent the street for demonstration use or to keep it clear for
traffic. In a purely libertarian world, where all streets are privately
owned, the various street owners will decide, at any given time, whether
to rent out the street for demonstrations, whom to rent it to, and what
price to charge. It would then be clear that what is involved is not a
“free speech” or “free assembly” question at all, but a question of
property rights: of the right of a group to offer to rent a street, and
of the right of the street owner either to accept or reject the offer.

## FREEDOM OF RADIO AND TELEVISION [freedom-of-radio-and-television]

There is one important area of American life where no effective freedom
of speech or the press does or can exist under the present system. That
is the entire field of radio and television. In this area, the federal
government, in the crucially important Radio Act of 1927, nationalized
the airwaves. In effect, the federal government took title to ownership
of all radio and television channels. It then presumed to grant
licenses, at its will or pleasure, for use of the channels to various
privately owned stations. On the one hand, the stations, since they
receive the licenses gratis, do not have to pay for the use of the
scarce airwaves, as they would on the free market. And so these stations
receive a huge subsidy, which they are eager to maintain. But on the
other hand, the federal government, as the licensor of the airwaves,
asserts the right and the power to regulate the stations minutely and
continuously. Thus, over the head of each station is the club of the
threat of nonrenewal, or even suspension, of its license. In
consequence, the idea of freedom of speech in radio and television is no
more than a mockery. Every station is grievously restricted, and forced
to fashion its programming to the dictates of the Federal Communications
Commission. So every station must have “balanced” programming, broadcast
a certain amount of “public service” announcements, grant equal time to
every political candidate for the same office and to expressions of
political opinion, censor “controversial” lyrics in the records it
plays, etc. For many years, no station was allowed to broadcast any
editorial opinion at all; now, every opinion must be balanced by
“responsible” editorial rebuttals.

Because every station and every broadcaster must always look over its
shoulder at the FCC, free expression in broadcasting is a sham. Is it
any wonder that television opinion, when it is expressed at all on
controversial issues, tends to be blandly in favor of the
“Establishment”?

The public has only put up with this situation because it has existed
since the beginning of large-scale commercial radio. But what would we
think, for example, if all newspapers were licensed, the licenses to be
renewable by a Federal Press Commission, and with newspapers losing
their licenses if they dare express an “unfair” editorial opinion, or if
they don’t give full weight to public service announcements? Would not
this be an intolerable, not to say unconstitutional, destruction of the
right to a free press? Or consider if all book publishers had to be
licensed, and their licenses were not renewable if their book lists
failed to suit a Federal Book Commission? Yet what we would all consider
intolerable and totalitarian for the press and the book publishers is
taken for granted in a medium which is now the most popular vehicle for
expression and education: radio and television. Yet the principles in
both cases are exactly the same.

Here we see, too, one of the fatal flaws in the idea of “democratic
socialism,” i.e., the idea that the government should own all resources
and means of production yet preserve and maintain freedom of speech and
the press for all its citizens. An abstract constitution guaranteeing
“freedom of the press” is meaningless in a socialist society. The point
is that where the government owns all the newsprint, the paper, the
presses, etc., the government—as owner—*must* decide how to allocate the
newsprint and the paper, and what to print on them. Just as the
government as street owner must make a decision how the street will be
used, so a socialist government will have to decide how to allocate
newsprint and all other resources involved in the areas of speech and
press: assembly halls, machines, trucks, etc. Any government may profess
its devotion to freedom of the press, yet allocate all of its newsprint
only to its defenders and supporters. A free press is again a mockery;
furthermore, why *should* a socialist government allocate any
considerable amount of its scarce resources to antisocialists? The
problem of genuine freedom of the press then becomes insoluble.

The solution for radio and television? Simple: Treat these media
precisely the same way the press and book publishers are treated. For
both the libertarian and the believer in the American Constitution the
government should withdraw completely from any role or interference in
all media of expression. In short, the federal government should
denationalize the airwaves and give or sell the individual channels to
private ownership. When private stations genuinely own their channels,
they will be truly free and independent; they will be able to put on any
programs they wish to produce, or that they feel their listeners want to
hear; and they will be able to express themselves in whichever way they
wish without fear of government retaliation. They will also be able to
sell or rent the airwaves to whomever they wish, and in that way the
users of the channels will no longer be artificially subsidized.

Furthermore, if TV channels become free, privately owned, and
independent, the big networks will no longer be able to put pressure
upon the FCC to outlaw the effective competition of pay-television. It
is only because the FCC has outlawed pay-TV that it has not been able to
gain a foothold. “Free TV” is, of course, not truly “free”; the programs
are paid for by the advertisers, and the consumer pays by covering the
advertising costs in the price of the product he buys. One might ask
what difference it makes to the consumer whether he pays the advertising
costs indirectly or pays directly for each program he buys. The
difference is that these are not the same consumers for the same
products. The television advertiser, for example, is always interested
in (a) gaining the widest possible viewing market; and (b) in gaining
those *particular* viewers who will be most susceptible to his message.
Hence, the programs will all be geared to the lowest common denominator
in the audience, and particularly to those viewers most susceptible to
the message; that is, those viewers who do not read newspapers or
magazines, so that the message will not duplicate the ads he sees there.
As a result, free-TV programs tend to be unimaginative, bland, and
uniform. Pay-TV would mean that each program would search for its own
market, and many specialized markets for specialized audiences would
develop—just as highly lucrative specialized markets have developed in
the magazine and book publishing fields. The quality of programs would
be higher and the offerings far more diverse. In fact, the menace of
potential pay-TV competition must be great for the networks to lobby for
years to keep it suppressed. But, of course, in a truly free market,
both forms of television, as well as cable-TV and other forms we cannot
yet envision, could and would enter the competition.

One common argument against private ownership of TV channels is that
these channels are “scarce,” and therefore have to be owned and
parcelled out by the government. To an economist, this is a silly
argument; *all* resources are scarce, in fact anything that has a price
on the market commands that price precisely *because* it is scarce. We
have to pay a certain amount for a loaf of bread, for shoes, for dresses
*because* they are all scarce. If they were not scarce but superabundant
like air, they would be free, and no one would have to worry about their
production or allocation. In the press area, newsprint is scarce, paper
is scarce, printing machinery and trucks are scarce, etc. The more
scarce they are the higher the price they will command, and vice versa.
Furthermore, and again pragmatically, there are far more television
channels available than are now in use. The FCC’s early decision to
force stations into the VHF instead of the UHF zone created far more of
a scarcity of channels than there needed to be.

Another common objection to private property in the broadcast media is
that private stations would interfere with each other’s broadcasts, and
that such widespread interference would virtually prevent any programs
from being heard or seen. But this is as absurd an argument for
nationalizing the airwaves as claiming that since people *can* drive
their cars over other people’s land this means that all cars—or
land—must be nationalized. The problem, in either case, is for the
courts to demarcate property titles carefully enough so that any
invasion of another’s property will be clear-cut and subject to
prosecution. In the case of land titles, this process is clear enough.
But the point is that the courts can apply a similar process of staking
out property rights in other areas—whether it be in airwaves, in water,
or in oil pools. In the case of airwaves, the task is to find the
technological unit—i.e., the place of transmission, the distance of the
wave, and the technological width of a clear channel—and then to
allocate property rights to this particular technological unit. If radio
station WXYZ, for example, is assigned a property right in broadcasting
on 1500 kilocycles, plus or minus a certain width of kilocycles, for 200
miles around Detroit, then any station which subsequently beams a
program into the Detroit area on this wavelength would be subject to
prosecution for interference with property rights. If the courts pursue
their task of demarking and defending property rights, then there is no
more reason to expect continual invasions of such rights in this area
than anywhere else.

Most people believe that this is precisely the reason the airwaves were
nationalized; that before the Radio Act of 1927, stations interfered
with each other’s signals and chaos ensued, and the federal government
was finally forced to step in to bring order and make a radio industry
feasible at last. But this is historical legend, not fact. The actual
history is *precisely the opposite*. For when interference on the same
channel began to occur, the injured party took the airwave aggressors
into court, and the courts were beginning to bring order out of the
chaos by very successfully applying the common law theory of property
rights—in very many ways similar to the libertarian theory—to this new
technological area. In short, the courts were beginning to assign
property rights in the airwaves to their “homesteading” users. It was
after the federal government saw the likelihood of this new extension of
private property that it rushed in to nationalize the airwaves, using
alleged chaos as the excuse.

To describe the picture a bit more fully, radio in the first years of
the century was almost wholly a means of communication for ships—either
ship-to-ship or ship-to-shore messages. The Navy Department was
interested in regulating radio as a means of ensuring safety at sea, and
the initial federal regulation, a 1912 act, merely provided that any
radio station had to have a license issued by the Secretary of Commerce.
No powers to regulate or to decide not to renew licenses were written
into the law, however, and when public broadcasting began in the early
1920s, Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover attempted to regulate the
stations. Court decisions in 1923 and 1926, however, struck down the
government’s power to regulate licenses, to fail to renew them, or even
to decide on which wavelengths the stations should
operate.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn2)^ At about the same time, the
courts were working out the concept of “homestead” private property
rights in the airwaves, notably in the case of *Tribune Co. v. Oak
Leaves Broadcasting* *Station* (Circuit Court, Cook County, Illinois,
1926). In this case the court held that the operator of an existing
station had a property right, acquired by prior use, sufficient to
enjoin a new station from using a radio frequency in any way so as to
cause interference with the signals of the prior
station.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn3)^ And so order was being brought
out of the chaos by means of the assignment of property rights. But it
was precisely this development that the government rushed in to
forestall.

The 1926 Zenith decision striking down the government’s power to
regulate or to fail to renew licenses, and forcing the Department of
Commerce to issue licenses to any station that applied, produced a great
boom in the broadcasting industry. Over two hundred new stations were
created in the nine months after the decision. As a result, Congress
rushed through a stopgap measure in July 1926 to *prevent* any property
rights in radio frequencies, and resolved that all licenses should be
limited to 90 days. By February 1927 the Congress passed the law
establishing the Federal Radio Commission, which nationalized the
airwaves and established powers similar to those of the current FCC.
That the aim of the knowledgeable politicians was *not* to prevent chaos
but to prevent private property in the airwaves as the solution to chaos
is demonstrated by the legal historian H.P. Warner. Warner states that
“grave fears were expressed by legislators, and those generally charged
with the administration of communications... that government regulation
of an effective sort might be permanently prevented through the accrual
of property rights in licenses or means of access, and that thus
franchises of the value of millions of dollars might be established for
all time.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn4)^ The net result, however, was
to establish equally valuable franchises anyway, but in a monopolistic
fashion through the largesse of the Federal Radio Commission and later
FCC rather than through competitive homesteading.

Among the numerous direct invasions of freedom of speech exercised by
the licensing power of the FRC and FCC, two cases will suffice. One was
in 1931, when the FRC denied renewal of license to a Mr. Baker, who
operated a radio station in Iowa. In denying renewal, the Commission
said:

> This Commission holds no brief for the Medical Associations and other
> parties whom Mr. Baker does not like. Their alleged sins may be at
> times of public importance, to be called to the attention of the
> public over the air in the right way. But this record discloses that
> Mr. Baker does not do so in any high-minded way. It shows that he
> continually and erratically over the air rides a personal hobby, his
> cancer cure ideas and his likes and dislikes of certain persons and
> things. Surely his infliction of all this on the listeners is not the
> proper use of a broadcasting license. Many of his utterances are
> vulgar, if not indeed indecent. Assuredly they are not uplifting or
> entertaining.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn5)^

Can we imagine the outcry if the federal government were to put a
newspaper or a book publisher out of business on similar grounds?

A recent act of the FCC was to threaten nonrenewal of license of radio
station KTRG in Honolulu, a major radio station in Hawaii. KTRG had been
broadcasting libertarian programs for several hours a day for
approximately two years. Finally, in late 1970, the FCC decided to open
lengthy hearings moving toward nonrenewal of license, the threatened
cost of which forced the owners to shut down the station
permanently.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn6)^

## PORNOGRAPHY [13-chap06.html#page127]

To the libertarian, the arguments between conservatives and liberals
over laws prohibiting pornography are distressingly beside the point.
The conservative position tends to hold that pornography is debasing and
immoral and therefore should be outlawed. Liberals tend to counter that
sex is good and healthy and that therefore pornography will only have
good effects, and that depictions of violence—say on television, in
movies, or in comic books—should be outlawed instead. Neither side deals
with the crucial point: that the good, bad, or indifferent consequences
of pornography, while perhaps an interesting problem in its own right,
is completely irrelevant to the question of whether or not it should be
outlawed. The libertarian holds that it is not the business of the
law—the use of retaliatory violence—to enforce anyone’s conception of
morality. It is not the business of the law—even if this were
practically possible, which is, of course, most unlikely—to make anyone
good or reverent or moral or clean or upright. This is for each
individual to decide for himself. It is only the business of legal
violence to defend people against the use of violence, to defend them
from violent invasions of their person or property. But if the
government presumes to outlaw pornography, it *itself* becomes the
genuine outlaw—for it is invading the property rights of people to
produce, sell, buy, or possess pornographic material.

We do not pass laws to make people upright; we do not pass laws to force
people to be kind to their neighbors or not to yell at the bus driver;
we do not pass laws to force people to be honest with their loved ones.
We do not pass laws to force them to eat X amount of vitamins per day.
Neither is it the business of government, nor of any legal agency, to
pass laws against the voluntary production or sale of pornography.
Whether pornography is good, bad, or indifferent should be of no
interest to the legal authorities.

The same holds true for the liberal bugbear of “the pornography of
violence.” Whether or not watching violence on television helps lead to
actual crimes should not come under the purview of the State. To outlaw
violent films because they *might* someday induce someone to commit a
crime is a denial of man’s free will, and a total denial, of course, of
the right of those who will *not* commit crimes to see the film. But
more important, it is no more justifiable—in fact, less so—to outlaw
violent films for this reason than it would be, as we have noted, to
lock up all teenage Negro males because they have a greater tendency to
commit crime than the rest of the population.

It should be clear, too, that prohibition of pornography is an invasion
of property right, of the right to produce, sell, buy, and own.
Conservatives who call for the outlawing of pornography do not seem to
realize that they are thereby violating the very concept of property
rights they profess to champion. It is also a violation of freedom of
the press, which, as we have seen, is really a subset of the general
right of private property.

Sometimes it seems that the *beau ideal* of many conservatives, as well
as of many liberals, is to put everyone into a cage and coerce him into
doing what the conservatives or liberals believe to be the moral thing.
They would of course be differently styled cages, but they would be
cages just the same. The conservative would ban illicit sex, drugs,
gambling, and impiety, and coerce everyone to act according to his
version of moral and religious behavior. The liberal would ban films of
violence, unesthetic advertising, football, and racial discrimination,
and, at the extreme, place everyone in a “Skinner box” to be run by a
supposedly benevolent liberal dictator. But the effect would be the
same: to reduce everyone to a subhuman level and to deprive everyone of
the most precious part of his or her humanity—the freedom to choose.

The irony, of course, is that by forcing men to be “moral”—i.e., to
*act* morally—the conservative or liberal jailkeepers would in reality
deprive men of the very *possibility* of being moral. The concept of
“morality” makes no sense unless the moral act is freely chosen.
Suppose, for example, that someone is a devout Muslim who is anxious to
have as many people as possible bow to Mecca three times a day; to him
let us suppose this is the highest moral act. But if he wields coercion
to *force* everyone to bow to Mecca, he is thereby depriving everyone of
the opportunity to be moral—to *choose freely* to bow to Mecca. Coercion
deprives a man of the freedom to choose and, therefore, of the
possibility of choosing morally.

The libertarian, in contrast to so many conservatives and liberals, does
not want to place man in any cage. What he wants for everyone is
freedom, the freedom to act morally or immorally, as each man shall
decide.

## SEX LAWS [sex-laws]

In recent years, liberals have fortunately been coming to the conclusion
that “any act between two (or more) consenting adults” should be legal.
It is unfortunate that the liberals have not yet widened this criterion
from sex to trade and exchange, for if they ever would, they would be
close to becoming full-scale libertarians. For the libertarian is
precisely interested in legalizing all interrelations whatever between
“consenting adults.” Liberals have also begun to call for the abolition
of “victimless crimes,” which would be splendid if “victims” were
defined with greater precision as victims of aggressive violence.

Since sex is a uniquely private aspect of life, it is particularly
intolerable that governments should presume to regulate and legislate
sexual behavior, yet of course this has been one of the State’s favorite
pastimes. Violent acts such as rape, of course, are to be classed as
crimes in the same way as any other act of violence against persons.

Oddly enough, while voluntary sexual activities have often been rendered
illegal and prosecuted by the State, accused rapists have been treated
far more gently by the authorities than accused perpetrators of other
forms of bodily assault. In many instances, in fact, the rape victim has
been virtually treated as the guilty party by the law enforcement
agencies—an attitude which is almost never taken toward victims of other
crimes. Clearly, an impermissible sexual double standard has been at
work. As the National Board of the American Civil Liberties Union
declared in March 1977:

> Sexual assault victims should he treated no differently from victims
> of other crimes. Sexual assault victims are often treated with
> skepticism and abuse at the hands of law enforcement and health
> services personnel. This treatment ranges from official disbelief and
> insensitivity to cruel and harsh probes of the victim’s lifestyle and
> motivation. Such abrogation of responsibility by institutions meant to
> assist and protect victims of crime can only compound the trauma of
> the victim’s original experience.

The double standard imposed by government can be remedied by removing
rape as a special category of legal and judicial treatment, and of
subsuming it under the general law of bodily assault. Whatever standards
are used for judges’ instructions to the jury, or for the admissibility
of evidence, should be applied similarly in all these cases.

If labor and persons in general are to be free, then so should there be
freedom for *prostitution*. Prostitution is a voluntary sale of a labor
service, and the government has no right to prohibit or restrict such
sales. It should be noted that many of the grimmer aspects of the
streetwalking trade have been brought about by the outlawing of
brothels. As long-lasting houses of prostitution operated by madams
anxious to cultivate goodwill among customers over a long time span,
brothels used to compete to provide high-quality service and build up
their “brand name.” The outlawing of brothels has forced prostitution
into a “black-market,” fly-by-night existence, with all the dangers and
general decline in quality this always entails. Recently, in New York
City, there has been a tendency for the police to crack down on
prostitution with the excuse that the trade is no longer “victimless,”
since many prostitutes commit crimes against their customers. To outlaw
trades that may attract crime, however, would in the same way justify
prohibition because many fights take place in bars. The answer is not to
outlaw the voluntary and truly lawful activity, but for the police to
see to it that the genuine crimes do not get committed. It should be
clear that advocacy of freedom for prostitution does not, for the
libertarian, in the least imply advocacy of prostitution itself. In
short, if a particularly puritanical government were to outlaw all
cosmetics, the libertarian would call for legalizing cosmetics without
in any sense implying that he favors—or for that matter, opposes—the use
of cosmetics themselves. On the contrary, depending upon his personal
ethics or esthetics, he might well agitate against the use of cosmetics
after they become legalized; his attempt is always to persuade rather
than to compel.

If sex should be free, then *birth control* should, of course, be free
as well. It is unfortunately characteristic of our society, however,
that scarcely has birth control been made legal when people—in this case
liberals—arise to agitate for birth control being made *compulsory*. It
is true, of course, that if my neighbor has a baby this may well affect
me for good or ill. But, then, almost everything that anyone does may
affect one or more people. To the libertarian, this is scarcely
justification for using force, which may *only* be used to combat or
restrain force itself. There is no right more personal, no freedom more
precious, than for any woman to decide to have, or not to have, a baby,
and it is totalitarian in the extreme for any government to presume to
deny her that right. Besides, if any family has more children than it
can support in comfort, the family itself will bear the main burden;
hence, the almost universal result that the wish to preserve a treasured
rise in living standards will induce a voluntary reduction of births by
the families themselves.

This brings us to the more complex case of *abortion*. For the
libertarian, the “Catholic” case against abortion, even if finally
rejected as invalid, cannot be dismissed out of hand. For the essence of
that case—not really “Catholic” at all in a theological sense—is that
abortion destroys a human life and is therefore murder, and hence cannot
be condoned. More than that, if abortion is truly murder, then the
Catholic—or any other person who shares this view—cannot just shrug his
shoulders and say that “Catholic” views should not be imposed upon
non-Catholics. Murder is not an expression of religious preference; no
sect, in the name of “freedom of religion,” can or should get away with
committing murder with the plea that its religion so commands. The vital
question then becomes: Should abortion be considered as murder?

Most discussion of the issue bogs down in *minutiae* about *when* human
life begins, when or if the fetus can be considered to be alive, etc.
All this is really irrelevant to the issue of the *legality* (again, not
necessarily the *morality*) of abortion. The Catholic antiabortionist,
for example, declares that all that he wants for the fetus is the rights
of any human being—i.e., the right not to be murdered. But there is more
involved here, and this is the crucial consideration. If we are to treat
the fetus as having the same rights as humans, then let us ask: What
*human* has the right to remain, unbidden, as an unwanted parasite
within some other human being’s body? This is the nub of the issue: the
absolute right of every person and hence every woman, to the ownership
of her own body. What the mother is doing in an abortion is causing an
unwanted entity within her body to be ejected from it: If the fetus
dies, this does not rebut the point that no being has a right to live,
unbidden, as a parasite within or upon some person’s body.

The common retort that the mother either originally wanted or at least
was responsible for placing the fetus within her body is, again, beside
the point. Even in the stronger case where the mother originally wanted
the child, the mother, as the property owner in her own body, has the
right to change her mind and to eject it.

If the State should not repress voluntary sexual activity, neither
should it discriminate for or against either sex. “Affirmative action”
decrees are an obvious way of compelling discrimination against males or
other groups in employment, admissions, or wherever this implicit quota
system is applied. But “protective” labor laws in regard to women
insidiously pretend to favor women when they really discriminate against
them by prohibiting them from working during certain hours or in certain
occupations. Women are prevented by law from exercising their individual
freedom of choice in deciding for themselves whether or not to enter
these occupations or to work during these supposedly onerous hours. In
this way, government prevents women from competing freely against men in
these areas.

All in all, the 1978 Libertarian Party platform is trenchant and to the
point in setting forth the libertarian position on governmental sex or
other discrimination: “No individual rights should be denied or abridged
by the laws of the United States or any state or locality on account of
sex, race, color, creed, age, national origin, or sexual preference.”

## WIRETAPPING [wiretapping]

Wiretapping is a contemptible invasion of privacy and of property right,
and of course should be outlawed as an invasive act. Few, if any, people
would condone private wiretapping. The controversy arises with those who
maintain that the police should be able to tap the wires of persons they
*suspect* as criminals. Otherwise, how would criminals be caught?

In the first place, from the pragmatic viewpoint, it is rare that
wiretapping is effective in such “one-shot” crimes as bank robbery.
Wiretapping is generally used in cases where the “business” is set up on
a regularized and continuing basis—such as narcotics and gambling—and is
therefore vulnerable to espionage and “bugging.” Secondly, we remain
with our contention that it is itself criminal to invade the property of
anyone not yet convicted of a crime. It may well be true, for example,
that if the government employed a ten-million man espionage force to spy
upon and tap the wires of the entire population, the total amount of
private crime would be reduced—just as it would if all ghetto residents
or teenage males were promptly incarcerated. But what would this be
compared to the mass crime that would thus be committed, legally and
without shame, by the government itself?

There is one concession we might make to the police argument, but it is
doubtful the police would be happy with the concession. It is proper to
invade the property of a thief, for example, who has himself invaded to
a far greater extent the property of others. Suppose the police decide
that John Jones is a jewel thief. They tap his wires, and use this
evidence to convict Jones of the crime. We might say that this tapping
is legitimate, and should go unpunished: *provided,* however, that if
Jones should prove *not* to be a thief, the police and the judges who
may have issued the court order for the tap are now to be adjudged
*criminals themselves* and sent to jail for their crime of unjust
wiretapping. This reform would have two happy consequences: no policeman
or judge would participate in wiretapping unless he was dead certain the
victim is indeed a criminal; and the police and judges would at last
join everyone else as equally subject to the rule of the criminal law.
Certainly equality of liberty requires that the law applies to everyone;
therefore any invasion of the property of a non-criminal by *anyone*
should be outlawed, regardless of who committed the deed. The policeman
who guessed wrong and thereby aggressed against a noncriminal should
therefore be considered just as guilty as any “private” wiretapper.

## GAMBLING [gambling]

There are few laws more absurd and iniquitous than the laws against
gambling. In the first place, the law, in its broadest sense, is clearly
unenforceable. If every time Jim and Jack made a quiet bet on a football
game, or on an election, or on virtually anything else, this were
illegal, an enormous multi-million-man gestapo would be required to
enforce such a law and to spy on everyone and ferret out every bet.
Another large super-espionage force would then be needed to spy on the
spies to make sure that they have not been bought off. Conservatives
like to retort to such arguments—used against laws outlawing sexual
practices, pornography, drugs, etc.—that the prohibition against murder
is not fully enforceable either, but this is no argument for repeal of
*that* law. This argument, however, ignores a crucial point: the mass of
the public, making an instinctive libertarian distinction, abhors and
condemns murder and does not engage in it; hence, the prohibition
becomes broadly enforceable. But the mass of the public is not as
convinced of the criminality of gambling, hence continues to engage in
it, and the law—properly—becomes unenforceable.

Since the laws against quiet betting are clearly unenforceable, the
authorities decide to concentrate on certain highly *visible* forms of
gambling, and confine their activities to them: roulette, bookies,
“numbers” betting—in short, on those areas where gambling is a fairly
regularized activity. But then we have a peculiar and surely totally
unsupportable kind of ethical judgment: roulette, horse betting, etc.,
are somehow morally evil and must be cracked down upon by the massed
might of the police, whereas quiet betting is morally legitimate and
need not be bothered.

In New York State, a particular form of imbecility developed over the
years: until recent years, all forms of horse betting were illegal
*except* those made at the tracks themselves. Why horse betting at
Aqueduct or Belmont race track should be perfectly moral and legitimate
while betting on the same race with your friendly neighborhood bookie
should be sinful and bring down the awful majesty of the law defies the
imagination. Unless, of course, if we consider the point of the law to
force betters to swell the coffers of the tracks. Recently, a new
wrinkle has developed. The City of New York has *itself* gone into the
horse-betting business, and betting at city-owned stores is perfectly
fine and proper, while betting with competing private bookies continues
to be sinful and outlawed. Clearly, the point of the system is first to
confer a special privilege upon the race tracks, and then upon the
city’s own betting installation. Various states are also beginning to
finance their ever-growing expenditures through lotteries, which thus
become conferred with the cloak of morality and respectability.

A standard argument for outlawing gambling is that, if the poor workman
is allowed to gamble, he will improvidently blow his weekly paycheck and
thereby render his family destitute. Aside from the fact that he can now
spend his payroll on friendly betting, this paternalistic and
dictatorial argument is a curious one. For it proves far too much: If we
must outlaw gambling because the masses might spend too much of their
substance, why should we not outlaw many other articles of mass
consumption? After all, if a workman is determined to blow his paycheck,
he has many opportunities to do so: he can improvidently spend too much
on a TV set, a hi-fi, liquor, baseball equipment, and countless other
goodies. The logic of prohibiting a man from gambling for his own or his
family’s good leads straight to that totalitarian cage, the cage in
which Pappa Government tells the man exactly what to do, how to spend
his money, how many vitamins he must ingest, and forces him to obey the
State’s dictates.

## NARCOTICS AND OTHER DRUGS [narcotics-and-other-drugs]

The case for outlawing any product or activity is essentially the same
twofold argument we have seen used to justify the compulsory commitment
of mental patients: it will harm the person involved, or it will lead
that person to commit crimes against others. It is curious that the
general—and justified—horror of drugs has led the mass of the public to
an irrational enthusiasm for outlawing them. The case against outlawing
narcotic and hallucinogenic drugs is far weaker than the case against
Prohibition, an experiment which the grisly era of the 1920s has
hopefully discredited for all time. For while narcotics are undoubtedly
more harmful than is alcohol, the latter can also be harmful, and
outlawing something because it may harm the user leads straight down the
logical garden path to our totalitarian cage, where people are
prohibited from eating candy and are forced to eat yogurt “for their own
good.” But in the far more imposing argument about harm to others,
alcohol is much more likely to lead to crimes, auto accidents, etc.,
than narcotics, which render the user preternaturally peaceful and
passive. There is, of course, a very strong connection between addiction
and crime, but the connection is the *reverse* of any argument for
prohibition. Crimes are committed by addicts driven to theft by the high
price of drugs caused by the outlawry itself! If narcotics were legal,
the supply would greatly increase, the high costs of black markets and
police payoffs would disappear, and the price would be low enough to
eliminate most addict-caused crime.

This is not to argue, of course, for prohibition of alcohol; once again,
to outlaw something which *might* lead to crime is an illegitimate and
invasive assault on the rights of person and property, an assault which,
again, would far more justify the immediate incarceration of all teenage
males. Only the overt commission of a crime should be illegal, and the
way to combat crimes committed under the influence of alcohol is to be
more diligent about the crimes themselves, not to outlaw the alcohol.
And this would have the further beneficial effect of reducing crimes
*not* committed under the influence of alcohol.

Paternalism in this area comes not only from the right; it is curious
that while liberals generally favor legalizing marijuana and sometimes
of heroin, they seem to yearn to outlaw cigarettes, on the ground that
cigarette smoking often causes cancer. Liberals have already managed to
use federal control of television to outlaw cigarette advertising on
that medium—and thereby to level a grave blow against the very freedom
of speech liberals are supposed to cherish.

Once again: Every man has the right to choose. Propagandize against
cigarettes as much as you want, but leave the individual free to run his
own life. Otherwise, we may as well outlaw all sorts of possible
carcinogenic agents—including tight shoes, improperly fitting false
teeth, excessive exposure to the sun, as well as excessive intake of ice
cream, eggs, and butter which might lead to heart disease. And, if such
prohibitions *prove unenforceable*, again the logic is to place people
in cages so that they will receive the proper amount of sun, the correct
diet, properly fitting shoes, and so on.

## POLICE CORRUPTION [police-corruption]

In the fall of 1971, the Knapp Commission focussed public attention on
the problem of widespread police corruption in New York City. Midst the
drama of individual cases, there is a danger of overlooking what is
clearly the central problem, a problem of which the Knapp Commission
itself was perfectly aware. In virtually every case of corruption, the
policemen were involved in regularly functioning businesses which, by
government fiat, had been declared illegal. And yet a vast number of
people, by demanding these goods and services, have shown that they do
not agree that such activities should be placed in the same category as
murder, theft, or assault. Indeed, in practically no case did the
“purchase” of the police involve these heinous crimes. In almost all
cases, they consisted of the police looking the other way while
legitimate, voluntary transactions took place.

The common law makes a vital distinction between a crime that is a
*malum in se* and one that is merely a *malum prohibitum*. A *malum in
se* is an act which the mass of the people instinctively feel is a
reprehensible crime which should be punished. This coincides roughly
with the libertarians’ definition of a crime as an invasion of person or
property: assault, theft, and murder. Other crimes are activities made
into crimes by government edict: it is in this far more widely tolerated
area that police corruption occurs.

In short, police corruption occurs in those areas where entrepreneurs
supply voluntary services to consumers, but where the government has
decreed that these services are illegal: narcotics, prostitution, and
gambling. Where gambling, for example, is outlawed, the law places into
the hands of the police assigned to the gambling detail the power to
sell the privilege of engaging in the gambling business. In short, it is
as if the police were empowered to issue special licenses to engage in
these activities, and then proceeded to sell these unofficial but vital
licenses at whatever price the traffic will bear. One policeman
testified that, if the law were to be fully enforced, not a single
construction site in New York City could continue functioning, so
intricately did the government wrap construction sites in a web of
trivial and impossible regulations. In short, whether consciously or
not, the government proceeds as follows: first it outlaws a certain
activity—drugs, gambling, construction, or whatever—then the
governmental police sell to would-be entrepreneurs in the field the
privilege of entering and continuing in business.

At best, the result of these actions is the imposition of higher cost,
and more restricted output, of the activity than would have occurred in
a free market. But the effects are still more pernicious. Often, what
the policemen sell is not just permission to function, but what is in
effect a privileged monopoly. In that case, a gambler pays off the
police not just to continue in business but also to freeze out any
competitors who might want to enter the industry. The consumers are then
saddled with privileged monopolists, and are barred from enjoying the
advantages of competition. It is no wonder, then, that when Prohibition
was finally repealed in the early 1930s, the main opponents of repeal
were, along with fundamentalist and Prohibitionist groups, the organized
bootleggers, who had enjoyed special monopolistic privileges from their
special arrangements with the police and other enforcement arms of
government.

The way, then, to eliminate police corruption is simple but effective:
abolish the laws against voluntary business activity and against all
“victimless crimes.” Not only would corruption be eliminated, but a
large number of police would then be freed to operate against the *real*
criminals, the aggressors against person and property. This, after all,
is supposed to be the function of the police in the first place.

We should realize, then, that the problem of police corruption, as well
as the broader question of government corruption in general, should be
placed in a wider context. The point is that *given* the unfortunate and
unjust laws prohibiting, regulating, and taxing certain activities,
corruption is highly beneficial to society. In a number of countries,
without corruption that nullified government prohibitions, taxes, and
exactions, virtually no trade or industry would be carried on at all.
Corruption greases the wheels of trade. The solution, then, is not to
deplore corruption and redouble enforcement against it, but to abolish
the crippling policies and laws of government that make corruption
necessary.

## GUN LAWS [gun-laws]

For most of the activities in this chapter, liberals tend to favor
freedom of trade and activity while conservatives yearn for rigorous
enforcement and maximum crackdowns against violators of the law. Yet,
mysteriously, in the drive for gun laws the positions tend to be
reversed. Every time a gun is used in a violent crime, liberals redouble
their agitation for the severe restriction, if not prohibition of
private ownership of guns, while conservatives oppose such restrictions
on behalf of individual freedom.

If, as libertarians believe, every individual has the right to own his
person and property, it then follows that he has the right to employ
violence to defend himself against the violence of criminal aggressors.
But for some odd reason, liberals have systematically tried to deprive
innocent persons of the means for defending themselves against
aggression. Despite the fact that the Second Amendment to the
Constitution guarantees that “the right of the people to keep and bear
arms shall not be infringed,” the government has systematically eroded
much of this right. Thus, in New York State, as in most other states,
the Sullivan Law prohibits the carrying of “concealed weapons” without a
license issued by the authorities. Not only has the carrying of guns
been grievously restricted by this unconstitutional edict, but the
government has extended this prohibition to almost any object that could
possibly serve as a weapon—even those that could only be used for
self-defense. As a result, potential victims of crime have been barred
from carrying knives, tear-gas pens, or even hatpins, and people who
have used such weapons in defending themselves against assault have
themselves been prosecuted by the authorities. In the cities, this
invasive prohibition against concealed weapons has in effect stripped
victims of any possible self-defense against crime. (It is true that
there is no official prohibition against carrying an *unconcealed*
weapon, but a man in New York City who, several years ago, tested the
law by walking the streets carrying a rifle was promptly arrested for
“disturbing the peace.”) Furthermore, victims are so hamstrung by
provisions against “undue” force in self-defense that the criminal is
automatically handed an enormous built-in advantage by the existing
legal system.

It should be clear that no physical object is *in itself* aggressive;
*any* object, whether it be a gun, a knife, or a stick, can be used for
aggression, for defense, or for numerous other purposes unconnected with
crime. It makes no more sense to outlaw or restrict the purchase and
ownership of guns than it does to outlaw the possession of knives,
clubs, hatpins, or stones. And how are all of these objects to be
outlawed, and if outlawed, how is the prohibition to be enforced?
Instead of pursuing innocent people carrying or possessing various
objects, then, the law should be concerned with combatting and
apprehending real criminals.

There is, moreover, another consideration which reinforces our
conclusion. If guns are restricted or outlawed, there is no reason to
expect that determined criminals are going to pay much attention to the
law. The criminals, then, will always be able to purchase and carry
guns; it will only be their innocent victims who will suffer from the
solicitous liberalism that imposes laws against guns and other weapons.
Just as drugs, gambling, and pornography should be made legal, so too
should guns and any other objects that might serve as weapons of
self-defense.

In a notable article attacking control of handguns (the type of gun
liberals most want to restrict), St. Louis University law professor Don
B. Kates, Jr., chides his fellow liberals for not applying the same
logic to guns that they use for marijuana laws. Thus, he points out that
there are over 50 million handgun owners in America today, and that,
based on polls and past experience, from two-thirds to over 80 percent
of Americans would fail to comply with a ban on handguns. The inevitable
result, as in the case of sex and marijuana laws, would be harsh
penalties and yet highly selective enforcement—breeding disrespect for
the law and law enforcement agencies. And the law would be enforced
selectively against those people whom the authorities didn’t like:
“Enforcement becomes progressively more haphazard until at last the laws
are used only against those who are unpopular with the police. We hardly
need to be reminded of the odious search and seizure tactics police and
government agents have often resorted to in order to trap violators of
these laws.” Kates adds that “if these arguments seem familiar, it is
probably because they parallel the standard liberal argument against pot
laws.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn7)^

Kates then adds a highly perceptive insight into this curious liberal
blind spot. For:

> Gun prohibition is the brainchild of white middle-class liberals who
> are oblivious to the situation of poor and minority people living in
> areas where the police have given up on crime control. Such liberals
> weren’t upset about marijuana laws, either, in the fifties when the
> busts were confined to the ghettos. Secure in well-policed suburbs or
> high-security apartments guarded by Pinkertons (whom no one proposes
> to disarm), the oblivious liberal derides gun ownership as “an
> anachronism from the Old West.”^[8](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn8)^

Kates further points out the demonstrated empirical value of
self-defense armed with guns; in Chicago, for example, armed civilians
justifiably killed three times as many violent criminals in the past
five years as did the police. And, in a study of several hundred violent
confrontations with criminals, Kates found the armed civilians to be
more successful than the police: the civilians defending themselves
captured, wounded, killed, or scared off criminals in 75 percent of the
confrontations, whereas the police only had a 61 percent success rate.
It is true that victims who resist robbery are more likely to be injured
than those who remain passive. But Kates points out neglected
qualifiers: (1) that resistance without a gun has been twice as
hazardous to the victim than resistance with one, and (2) that the
choice of resistance is up to the victim and his circumstances and
values.

> Avoiding injury will be paramount to a white, liberal academic with a
> comfortable bank account. It will necessarily be less important to the
> casual laborer or welfare recipient who is being robbed of the
> wherewithal to support his family for a month—or to a black shopkeeper
> who can’t get robbery insurance and will be literally run out of
> business by successive robberies.

And the 1975 national survey of handgun owners by the Decision Making
Information organization found that the leading subgroups who own a gun
*only* for self-defense include blacks, the lowest income groups, and
senior citizens. “These are the people,” Kates eloquently warns, “it is
proposed we jail because they insist on keeping the only protection
available for their families in areas in which the police have given
up.”^[9](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn9)^

What of historical experience? Have handgun bans really greatly lowered
the degree of violence in society, as liberals claim? The evidence is
precisely to the contrary. A massive study done at the University of
Wisconsin concluded unequivocally in the fall of 1975 that “gun control
laws have no individual or collective effect in reducing the rate of
violent crime.” The Wisconsin study, for example, tested the theory that
ordinarily peaceful people will be irresistibly tempted to shoot their
guns if available when tempers are being frayed. The study found *no
correlation whatever* between rates of handgun ownership and rates of
homicide when compared, state by state. Moreover, this finding is
reinforced by a 1976 Harvard study of a Massachusetts law providing a
mandatory minimum year in prison for anyone found possessing a handgun
without a government permit. It turns out that, during the year 1975,
this 1974 law did indeed considerably reduce the carrying of firearms
and the number of assaults with firearms. But, lo and behold! the
Harvard researchers found to their surprise that there was no
corresponding reduction in any type of violence. That is,

> As previous criminological studies have suggested, deprived of a
> handgun, a momentarily enraged citizen will resort to the far more
> deadly long gun. Deprived of all firearms, he will prove almost as
> deadly with knives, hammers, etc.

And clearly, “if reducing handgun ownership does not reduce homicide or
other violence, a handgun ban is just one more diversion of police
resources from real crime to victimless
crime.”^[10](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn10)^

Finally, Kates makes another intriguing point: that a society where
peaceful citizens are armed is far more likely to be one where Good
Samaritans who voluntarily go to the aid of victims of crime will
flourish. But take away people’s guns, and the public—disastrously for
the victims—will tend to leave the matter to the police. Before New York
State outlawed handguns, Good Samaritan instances were far more
widespread than now. And, in a recent survey of Good Samaritan cases no
less than 81 percent of the Samaritans were owners of guns. If we wish
to encourage a society where citizens come to the aid of neighbors in
distress, we must not strip them of the actual power to do something
about crime. Surely, it is the height of absurdity to disarm the
peaceful public and *then*, as is quite common, to denounce them for
“apathy” for failing to rush to the rescue of victims of criminal
assault.

