---
title: Property and Exchange
---

## The Nonaggression Axiom

No man or group of men may aggress against the person or property of anyone
else. This may be called the “nonaggression axiom.” “Aggression” is defined as
the initiation of the use or threat of physical violence against the person or
property of anyone else

If no man may aggress against another; if, in short, everyone has the
absolute right to be “free” from aggression, then this at once implies the
freedom to speak, publish, assemble, and to engage in such “victimless
crimes” as pornography, sexual deviation, and prostitution. Furthermore,
conscription is slavery on a massive scale. And since war, especially
modern war, entails the mass slaughter of civilians, it is mass murder and
therefore totally illegitimate.

If every individual has the right to his own property without having to
suffer aggressive depredation, then he also has the right to give away his
property (bequest and inheritance) and to exchange it for the property of
others (free contract and the free market economy) without interference.

While opposing any and all private or group aggression against the rights of
person and property, throughout history and into the present day, there has
been one central, dominant, and overriding aggressor upon all of these rights:
the State. The State habitually commits mass murder, which it calls “war,” or
sometimes “suppression of subversion”; the State engages in enslavement into
its military forces, which it calls “conscription”; and it lives and has its
being in the practice of forcible theft, which it calls “taxation.” Whether or
not such practices are supported by the majority of the population is not
germane to their nature: regardless of popular sanction, War is Mass Murder,
Conscription is Slavery, and Taxation is Robbery.

Whatever services the government actually performs could be supplied far more
efficiently and far more morally by private and cooperative enterprise.

All governments subsist by exploitive rule over the public; and such rule is
the reverse of objective necessity. The very existence of taxation and the
State necessarily sets up a class division between the exploiting rulers and
the exploited ruled. The task of the court intellectuals who have always
supported the State has ever been to weave mystification in order to induce the
public to accept State rule, and these intellectuals obtain, in return, a share
in the power and pelf extracted by the rulers from their deluded subjects.

Taxation is legalized and organized theft on a grand scale.

## Property Rights

The activity of each inorganic and organic entity is determined by its own
nature and by the nature of the other entities with which it comes in contact.
Specifically, while the behavior of plants and at least the lower animals is
determined by their biological nature or perhaps by their “instincts,” the
nature of man is such that each individual person must, in order to act, choose
his own ends and employ his own means in order to attain them. Each man must
learn about himself and the world, use his mind to select values, learn about
cause and effect, and act purposively to maintain himself and advance his life.
Since men can think, feel, evaluate, and act only as individuals, it becomes
vitally necessary for each man’s survival and prosperity that he be free to
learn, choose, develop his faculties, and act upon his knowledge and values.
This is the necessary path of human nature; to interfere with and cripple this
process by using violence goes profoundly against what is necessary by man’s
nature for his life and prosperity. Violent interference with a man’s learning
and choices is therefore profoundly “antihuman”; it violates the natural law of
man’s needs.

The right to self-ownership asserts the absolute right of each man, by virtue
of his being a human being, to “own” his own body; that is, to control that
body free of coercive interference. Since each individual must think, learn,
value, and choose his ends and means in order to survive and flourish, the
right to self-ownership gives man the right to perform these vital activities
without being hampered and restricted by coercive molestation.

## Society and the Individual

Only individuals exist, think, feel, choose, and act; “society” is not a living
entity but simply a label for a set of interacting individuals. Treating
society as a thing that chooses and acts, then, serves to obscure the real
forces at work.

When the individuals disappear so does the whole. The whole has no separate
existence. Using the collective noun with a singular verb leads into a trap of
the imagination; to personalize the collectivity and to think of it as having a
body and a psyche of its own.

## Free Exchange and Free Contract

The farmer exchanges the wheat for money; the wheat is bought by the miller who
processes and transforms the wheat into flour; the miller sells the flour to
the baker who produces bread; the baker sells the bread to the wholesaler, who
in turn sells it to the retailer, who finally sells it to the consumer. And at
each step of the way, the producer may hire the labor services of the workers
in exchange for money. How “money” enters the equation is a complex process;
but it should be clear that *conceptually* the use of money is equivalent to
any single or group of useful commodities that are exchanged for the wheat,
flour, etc. Instead of money, the commodity exchanged could be cloth, iron, or
whatever. At each step of the way, mutually beneficial exchanges of property
titles are agreed upon and transacted.

Freedom is a condition in which a person’s ownership rights in his own body and
his legitimate material property are *not* invaded, are not aggressed against.
A man who steals another man’s property is invading and restricting the
victim’s freedom, as does the man who beats another over the head. Freedom and
unrestricted property right go hand in hand. On the other hand, “crime” is an
act of aggression against a man’s property right, either in his own person or
his materially owned objects. Crime is an invasion, by the use of violence,
against a man’s property and therefore against his liberty. “Slavery”—the
opposite of freedom—is a condition in which the slave has little or no right of
self-ownership; his person and his produce are systematically expropriated by
his master by the use of violence.

The only “equality” is the equal right of every man to the property in his own
person, to the property in the unused resources he transforms and to the
property of others he has acquired either through voluntary exchange or gift.

## Property Rights and “Human Rights”

“Human Rights” and “property rights” are inextricably intertwined; they stand
or fall together.

If the government owns all the newsprint, it then necessarily has the right and
the power to allocate that newsprint, and someone’s “right to a free press”
becomes a mockery if the government decides not to allocate newsprint in his
direction.

The basic flaw in the separation of “human rights” and “property rights” is
that people are treated as ethereal abstractions. If a man has the right to
self-ownership, to the control of his life, then in the real world he must also
have the right to sustain his life by grappling with and transforming
resources; he must be able to own the ground and the resources on which he
stands and which he must use. In short, to sustain his “human right”—or his
property rights in his own person—he must also have the property right in the
material world, in the objects which he produces. Property rights *are* human
rights. The human right of a free press depends upon the human right of private
property in newsprint.

In fact, there *are no* human rights that are separable from property rights.
The human right of free speech is simply the property right to hire an assembly
hall from the owners, or to own one oneself; the human right of a free press is
the property right to buy materials and then print leaflets or books and to
sell them to those who are willing to buy. There is no extra “right of free
speech” or free press beyond property rights. And furthermore, discovering and
identifying the property rights involved will resolve any apparent conflicts of
rights that may crop up.

No one has the right to cry “fire” falsely in a crowded theater.

The fellow who brings on a riot by falsely shouting “fire” in a crowded theater
is, necessarily, either the owner of the theater or a paying patron. If he is
the owner, then he has committed fraud on his customers. He has taken their
money in exchange for a promise to put on a movie or play, and now, instead, he
disrupts the show by falsely shouting “fire” and breaking up the performance.
He has thus welshed on his contractual obligation, and has thereby stolen the
property—the money—of his patrons and has violated their property rights.

If the shouter is a patron , he is violating the property right of the owner—as
well as of the other guests to their paidfor performance. As a guest, he has
gained access to the property on certain terms, including an obligation not to
violate the owner’s property or to disrupt the performance the owner is putting
on. His act, therefore, violates the property rights of the theater owner and
of all the other patrons.

The rights of the individual are *still* absolute; but they are *property*
rights. The fellow who maliciously cried “fire” in a crowded theater is indeed
a criminal, but *not* because his so-called “right of free speech” must be
pragmatically restricted on behalf of the “public good”; he is a criminal
because he has clearly and obviously violated the property rights of another
person.
