---
title: Nio-Libyrti
date: 2021-02-23
---

## Liberty, the only way

Mostly based on 'A new liberty', by Murray Rothbard

# CONTENTS

[**Part I: The Libertarian Creed**](#7-part01.html)

[2. Property and Exchange](#8-chap02.html)

[3. The State](#9-chap03.html)

[**Part II: Libertarian Applications to Current
Problems**](#10-part02.html)

[4. The Problems](#11-chap04.html)

[5. Involuntary Servitude](#12-chap05.html)

[6. Personal Liberty](#13-chap06.html)

[7. Education](#14-chap07.html)

[8. Welfare and the Welfare State](#15-chap08.html)

[9. Inflation and the Business Cycle: The Collapse of the Keynesian
Paradigm](#16-chap09.html)

[10. The Public Sector, I: Government in Business](#17-chap10.html)

[11. The Public Sector, II: Streets and Roads](#18-chap11.html)

[12. The Public Sector, III: Police, Law, and the
Courts](#19-chap12.html)

[13. Conservation, Ecology, and Growth](#20-chap13.html)

[14. War and Foreign Policy](#21-chap14.html)

[**Part III: Epilogue**](#22-part03.html)

[15. A Strategy for Liberty](#23-chap15.html)

[Index](#25-index.html)


# PART I [7-part01.html#page25]

# THE LIBERTARIAN CREED [the-libertarian-creed]

# 2 PROPERTY AND EXCHANGE [8-chap02.html#page27]

## THE NONAGGRESSION AXIOM [the-nonaggression-axiom]

The libertarian creed rests upon one central axiom: that no man or group
of men may aggress against the person or property of anyone else. This
may be called the “nonaggression axiom.” “Aggression” is defined as the
initiation of the use or threat of physical violence against the person
or property of anyone else. Aggression is therefore synonymous with
invasion.

If no man may aggress against another; if, in short, everyone has the
absolute right to be “free” from aggression, then this at once implies
that the libertarian stands foursquare for what are generally known as
“civil liberties”: the freedom to speak, publish, assemble, and to
engage in such “victimless crimes” as pornography, sexual deviation, and
prostitution (which the libertarian does not regard as “crimes” at all,
since he defines a “crime” as violent invasion of someone else’s person
or property). Furthermore, he regards conscription as slavery on a
massive scale. And since war, especially modern war, entails the mass
slaughter of civilians, the libertarian regards such conflicts as mass
murder and therefore totally illegitimate.

All of these positions are now considered “leftist” on the contemporary
ideological scale. On the other hand, since the libertarian also opposes
invasion of the rights of private property, this also means that he just
as emphatically opposes government interference with property rights or
with the free-market economy through controls, regulations, subsidies,
or prohibitions. For if every individual has the right to his own
property without having to suffer aggressive depredation, then he also
has the right to give away his property (bequest and inheritance) and to
exchange it for the property of others (free contract and the free
market economy) without interference. The libertarian favors the right
to unrestricted private property and free exchange; hence, a system of
“laissez-faire capitalism.”

In current terminology again, the libertarian position on property and
economics would be called “extreme right wing.” But the libertarian sees
no inconsistency in being “leftist” on some issues and “rightist” on
others. On the contrary, he sees his own position as virtually the
*only* consistent one, consistent on behalf of the liberty of every
individual. For how can the leftist be opposed to the violence of war
and conscription while at the same time supporting the violence of
taxation and government control? And how can the rightist trumpet his
devotion to private property and free enterprise while at the same time
favoring war, conscription, and the outlawing of noninvasive activities
and practices that he deems immoral? And how can the rightist favor a
free market while seeing nothing amiss in the vast subsidies,
distortions, and unproductive inefficiencies involved in the
military-industrial complex?

While opposing any and all private or group aggression against the
rights of person and property, the libertarian sees that throughout
history and into the present day, there has been one central, dominant,
and overriding aggressor upon all of these rights: the State. In
contrast to all other thinkers, left, right, or in-between, the
libertarian refuses to give the State the moral sanction to commit
actions that almost everyone agrees would be immoral, illegal, and
criminal if committed by any person or group in society. The
libertarian, in short, insists on applying the general moral law to
everyone, and makes no special exemptions for any person or group. But
if we look at the State naked, as it were, we see that it is universally
allowed, and even encouraged, to commit all the acts which even
non-libertarians concede are reprehensible crimes. The State habitually
commits mass murder, which it calls “war,” or sometimes “suppression of
subversion”; the State engages in enslavement into its military forces,
which it calls “conscription”; and it lives and has its being in the
practice of forcible theft, which it calls “taxation.” The libertarian
insists that whether or not such practices are supported by the majority
of the population is not germane to their nature: that, regardless of
popular sanction, War is Mass Murder, Conscription is Slavery, and
Taxation is Robbery. The libertarian, in short, is almost completely the
child in the fable, pointing out insistently that the emperor has no
clothes.

Throughout the ages, the emperor has had a series of pseudo-clothes
provided for him by the nation’s intellectual caste. In past centuries,
the intellectuals informed the public that the State or its rulers were
divine, or at least clothed in divine authority, and therefore what
might *look* to the naive and untutored eye as despotism, mass murder,
and theft on a grand scale was only the divine working its benign and
mysterious ways in the body politic. In recent decades, as the divine
sanction has worn a bit threadbare, the emperor’s “court intellectuals”
have spun ever more sophisticated apologia: informing the public that
what the government does is for the “common good” and the “public
welfare,” that the process of taxation-and-spending works through the
mysterious process of the “multiplier” to keep the economy on an even
keel, and that, in any case, a wide variety of governmental “services”
could not possibly be performed by citizens acting voluntarily on the
market or in society. All of this the libertarian denies: he sees the
various apologia as fraudulent means of obtaining public support for the
State’s rule, and he insists that whatever services the government
actually performs could be supplied far more efficiently and far more
morally by private and cooperative enterprise.

The libertarian therefore considers one of his prime educational tasks
is to spread the demystification and desanctification of the State among
its hapless subjects. His task is to demonstrate repeatedly and in depth
that not only the emperor but even the “democratic” State has no
clothes; that all governments subsist by exploitive rule over the
public; and that such rule is the reverse of objective necessity. He
strives to show that the very existence of taxation and the State
necessarily sets up a class division between the exploiting rulers and
the exploited ruled. He seeks to show that the task of the court
intellectuals who have always supported the State has ever been to weave
mystification in order to induce the public to accept State rule, and
that these intellectuals obtain, in return, a share in the power and
pelf extracted by the rulers from their deluded subjects.

Take, for example, the institution of taxation, which statists have
claimed is in some sense really “voluntary.” Anyone who truly believes
in the “voluntary” nature of taxation is invited to refuse to pay taxes
and to see what then happens to him. If we analyze taxation, we find
that, among all the persons and institutions in society, only the
government acquires its revenues through coercive violence. Everyone
else in society acquires income *either* through voluntary gift (lodge,
charitable society, chess club) *or* through the sale of goods or
services voluntarily purchased by consumers. If anyone *but* the
government proceeded to “tax,” this would clearly be considered coercion
and thinly disguised banditry. Yet the mystical trappings of
“sovereignty” have so veiled the process that only libertarians are
prepared to call taxation what it is: legalized and organized theft on a
grand scale.

## PROPERTY RIGHTS [property-rights]

If the central axiom of the libertarian creed is nonaggression against
anyone’s person and property, how is this axiom arrived at? What is its
groundwork or support? Here, libertarians, past and present, have
differed considerably. Roughly, there are three broad types of
foundation for the libertarian axiom, corresponding to three kinds of
ethical philosophy: the emotivist, the utilitarian, and the natural
rights viewpoint. The emotivists assert that they take liberty or
nonaggression as their premise purely on subjective, emotional grounds.
While their own intense emotion might seem a valid basis for their own
political philosophy, this can scarcely serve to convince anyone else.
By ultimately taking themselves outside the realm of rational discourse,
the emotivists thereby insure the lack of general success of their own
cherished doctrine.

The utilitarians declare, from their study of the consequences of
liberty as opposed to alternative systems, that liberty will lead more
surely to widely approved goals: harmony, peace, prosperity, etc. Now no
one disputes that relative consequences should be studied in assessing
the merits or demerits of respective creeds. But there are many problems
in confining ourselves to a utilitarian ethic. For one thing,
utilitarianism assumes that we can weigh alternatives, and decide upon
policies, on the basis of their good or bad *consequences*. But if it is
legitimate to apply value judgments to the *consequences* of X, why is
it not equally legitimate to apply such judgments to X *itself*? May
there not be something about an act itself which, in its very nature,
can be considered good or evil?

Another problem with the utilitarian is that he will rarely adopt a
principle as an absolute and consistent yardstick to apply to the varied
concrete situations of the real world. He will only use a principle, at
best, as a vague guideline or aspiration, as a *tendency* which he may
choose to override at any time. This was the major defect of the
nineteenth-century English Radicals, who had adopted the laissez-faire
view of the eighteenth-century liberals but had substituted a supposedly
“scientific” utilitarianism for the supposedly “mystical” concept of
natural rights as the groundwork for that philosophy. Hence the
nineteenth-century laissez-faire liberals came to use laissez-faire as a
vague tendency rather than as an unblemished yardstick, and therefore
increasingly and fatally compromised the libertarian creed. To say that
a utilitarian cannot be “trusted” to maintain libertarian principle in
every specific application may sound harsh, but it puts the case fairly.
A notable contemporary example is the free-market economist Professor
Milton Friedman who, like his classical economist forebears, holds to
freedom as against State intervention as a general tendency, but in
practice allows a myriad of damaging exceptions, exceptions which serve
to vitiate the principle almost completely, notably in the fields of
police and military affairs, education, taxation, welfare, “neighborhood
effects,” antitrust laws, and money and banking.

Let us consider a stark example: Suppose a society which fervently
considers all redheads to be agents of the Devil and therefore to be
executed whenever found. Let us further assume that only a small number
of redheads exist in any generation—so few as to be statistically
insignificant. The utilitarian-libertarian might well reason: “While the
murder of isolated redheads is deplorable, the executions are small in
number; the vast majority of the public, as non-redheads, achieves
enormous psychic satisfaction from the public execution of redheads. The
social cost is negligible, the social, psychic benefit to the rest of
society is great; therefore, it is right and proper for society to
execute the redheads.” The natural-rights libertarian, overwhelmingly
concerned as he is for the *justice* of the act, will react in horror
and staunchly and unequivocally oppose the executions as totally
unjustified murder and aggression upon nonaggressive persons. The
*consequence* of stopping the murders—depriving the bulk of society of
great psychic pleasure—would not influence such a libertarian, the
“absolutist” libertarian, in the slightest. Dedicated to justice and to
logical consistency, the natural-rights libertarian cheerfully admits to
being “doctrinaire,” to being, in short, an unabashed follower of his
own doctrines.

Let us turn then to the natural-rights basis for the libertarian creed,
a basis which, in one form or another, has been adopted by most of the
libertarians, past and present. “Natural rights” is the cornerstone of a
political philosophy which, in turn, is embedded in a greater structure
of “natural law.” Natural law theory rests on the insight that we live
in a world of more than one—in fact, a vast number—of entities, and that
each entity has distinct and specific properties, a distinct “nature,”
which can be investigated by man’s reason, by his sense perception and
mental faculties. Copper has a distinct nature and behaves in a certain
way, and so do iron, salt, etc. The species man, therefore, has a
specifiable nature, as does the world around him and the ways of
interaction between them. To put it with undue brevity, the activity of
each inorganic and organic entity is determined by its own nature and by
the nature of the other entities with which it comes in contact.
Specifically, while the behavior of plants and at least the lower
animals is determined by their biological nature or perhaps by their
“instincts,” the nature of man is such that each individual person must,
in order to act, choose his own ends and employ his own means in order
to attain them. Possessing no automatic instincts, each man must learn
about himself and the world, use his mind to select values, learn about
cause and effect, and act purposively to maintain himself and advance
his life. Since men can think, feel, evaluate, and act only as
individuals, it becomes vitally necessary for each man’s survival and
prosperity that he be free to learn, choose, develop his faculties, and
act upon his knowledge and values. This is the necessary path of human
nature; to interfere with and cripple this process by using violence
goes profoundly against what is necessary by man’s nature for his life
and prosperity. Violent interference with a man’s learning and choices
is therefore profoundly “antihuman”; it violates the natural law of
man’s needs.

Individualists have always been accused by their enemies of being
“atomistic”—of postulating that each individual lives in a kind of
vacuum, thinking and choosing without relation to anyone else in
society. This, however, is an authoritarian straw man; few, if any,
individualists have ever been “atomists.” On the contrary, it is evident
that individuals always learn from each other, cooperate and interact
with each other; and that this, too, is required for man’s survival. But
the point is that each individual makes the final choice of which
influences to adopt and which to reject, or of which to adopt first and
which afterwards. The libertarian welcomes the process of voluntary
exchange and cooperation between freely acting individuals; what he
abhors is the use of violence to cripple such voluntary cooperation and
force someone to choose and act in ways different from what his own mind
dictates.

The most viable method of elaborating the natural-rights statement of
the libertarian position is to divide it into parts, and to begin with
the basic axiom of the “right to self-ownership.” The right to
self-ownership asserts the absolute right of each man, by virtue of his
(or her) being a human being, to “own” his or her own body; that is, to
control that body free of coercive interference. Since each individual
must think, learn, value, and choose his or her ends and means in order
to survive and flourish, the right to self-ownership gives man the right
to perform these vital activities without being hampered and restricted
by coercive molestation.

Consider, too, the consequences of *denying* each man the right to own
his own person. There are then only two alternatives: either (1) a
certain class of people, *A*, have the right to own another class, *B*;
or (2) everyone has the right to own his own equal quotal share of
everyone else. The first alternative implies that while Class *A*
deserves the rights of being human, Class *B* is in reality subhuman and
therefore deserves no such rights. But since they *are* indeed human
beings, the first alternative contradicts itself in denying natural
human rights to one set of humans. Moreover, as we shall see, allowing
Class *A* to own Class *B* means that the former is allowed to exploit,
and therefore to live parasitically, at *the expense* of the latter. But
this parasitism itself violates the basic economic requirement for life:
production and exchange.

The second alternative, what we might call “participatory communalism”
or “communism,” holds that every man should have the right to own his
equal quotal share of everyone else. If there are two billion people in
the world, then everyone has the right to own one two-billionth of every
other person. In the first place, we can state that this ideal rests on
an absurdity: proclaiming that every man is entitled to own a part of
everyone else, yet is not entitled *to own himself*. Secondly, we can
picture the viability of such a world: a world in which *no* man is free
to take *any* action whatever without prior approval or indeed command
by *everyone* else in society. It should be clear that in that sort of
“communist” world, no one would be able to do anything, and the human
race would quickly perish. But if a world of zero self-ownership and one
hundred percent other ownership spells death for the human race, then
any steps in that direction also contravene the natural law of what is
best for man and his life on earth.

Finally, however, the participatory communist world *cannot* be put into
practice. For it is physically impossible for everyone to keep continual
tabs on everyone else, and thereby to exercise his equal quotal share of
partial ownership over every other man. In practice, then, the concept
of universal and equal other-ownership is utopian and impossible, and
supervision and therefore control and ownership of others necessarily
devolves upon a specialized group of people, who thereby become a ruling
class. Hence, in practice, any attempt at communist rule will
automatically become class rule, and we would be back at our first
alternative.

The libertarian therefore rejects these alternatives and concludes by
adopting as his primary axiom the universal right of self-ownership, a
right held by everyone by virtue of being a human being. A more
difficult task is to settle on a theory of property in nonhuman objects,
in the things of this earth. It is comparatively easy to recognize the
practice when someone is aggressing against the property right of
another’s person: If *A* assaults *B*, he is violating the property
right of *B* in his own body. But with nonhuman objects the problem is
more complex. If, for example, we see *X* seizing a watch in the
possession of *Y* we cannot automatically assume that *X* is aggressing
against *Y*’s right of property in the watch; for may not *X* have been
the original, “true” owner of the watch who can therefore be said to be
repossessing his own legitimate property? In order to decide, we need a
theory of justice in property, a theory that will tell us whether *X* or
*Y* or indeed someone else is the legitimate owner.

Some libertarians attempt to resolve the problem by asserting that
whoever the existing government decrees has the property title should be
considered the just owner of the property. At this point, we have not
yet delved deeply into the nature of government, but the anomaly here
should be glaring enough: it is surely odd to find a group eternally
suspicious of virtually any and all functions of government suddenly
leaving it to government to define and apply the precious concept of
property, the base and groundwork of the entire social order. It is
particularly the utilitarian laissez-fairists who believe it most
feasible to begin the new libertarian world by confirming all existing
property titles; that is, property titles and rights as decreed by the
very government that is condemned as a chronic aggressor.

Let us illustrate with a hypothetical example. Suppose that libertarian
agitation and pressure has escalated to such a point that the government
and its various branches are ready to abdicate. But they engineer a
cunning ruse. Just before the government of New York state abdicates it
passes a law turning over the entire territorial area of New York to
become the private property of the Rockefeller family. The Massachusetts
legislature does the same for the Kennedy family. And so on for each
state. The government could then abdicate and decree the abolition of
taxes and coercive legislation, but the victorious libertarians would
now be confronted with a dilemma. Do they recognize the new property
titles as legitimately private property? The utilitarians, who have no
theory of justice in property rights, would, if they were consistent
with their acceptance of given property titles as decreed by government,
have to accept a new social order in which fifty new satraps would be
collecting taxes in the form of unilaterally imposed “rent.” The point
is that *only* natural-rights libertarians, only those libertarians who
have a theory of justice in property titles that does not depend on
government decree, could be in a position to scoff at the new rulers’
claims to have private property in the territory of the country, and to
rebuff these claims as invalid. As the great nineteenth-century liberal
Lord Acton saw clearly, the natural law provides the only sure ground
for a continuing critique of governmental laws and
decrees.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn1)^ What, specifically, the
natural-rights position on property titles may be is the question to
which we now turn.

We have established each individual’s right to self-ownership, to a
property right in his own body and person. But people are not floating
wraiths; they are not self-subsistent entities; they can only survive
and flourish by grappling with the earth around them. They must, for
example, *stand* on land areas; they must also, in order to survive and
maintain themselves, transform the resources given by nature into
“consumer goods,” into objects more suitable for their use and
consumption. Food must be grown and eaten; minerals must be mined and
then transformed into capital and then useful consumer goods, etc. Man,
in other words, must own not only his own person, but also material
objects for his control and use. How, then, should the property titles
in these objects be allocated?

Let us take, as our first example, a sculptor fashioning a work of art
out of clay and other materials; and let us waive, for the moment, the
question of original property rights in the clay and the sculptor’s
tools. The question then becomes: *Who* owns the work of art as it
emerges from the sculptor’s fashioning? It is, in fact, the sculptor’s
“creation,” not in the sense that he has created matter, but in the
sense that he has transformed nature-given matter—the clay—into another
form dictated by his own ideas and fashioned by his own hands and
energy. Surely, it is a rare person who, with the case put thus, would
say that the sculptor does not have the property right in his own
product. Surely, if every man has the right to own his own body, and if
he must grapple with the material objects of the world in order to
survive, then the sculptor has the right to own the product he has made,
by his energy and effort, a veritable *extension* of his own
personality. He has placed the stamp of his person upon the raw
material, by “mixing his labor” with the clay, in the phrase of the
great property theorist John Locke. And the product transformed by his
own energy has become the material embodiment of the sculptor’s ideas
and vision. John Locke put the case this way:

> ... every man has a *property* in his own *person*. This nobody has
> any right to but himself. The *labour* of his body and the *work* of
> his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever, then, he removes
> out of the state that nature hath provided and left it in, he hath
> mixed his labour with it, and joined it to something that is his own,
> and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the
> common state nature placed it in, it hath by this labour something
> annexed to it that excludes the common right of other men. For this
> labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but
> he can have a right to what that is once joined
> to.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn2)^

As in the case of the ownership of people’s bodies, we again have three
logical alternatives: (1) either the transformer, or “creator” has the
property right in his creation; or (2) another man or set of men have
the right in that creation, i.e., have the right to appropriate it by
force without the sculptor’s consent; or (3) every individual in the
world has an equal, quotal share in the ownership of the sculpture—the
“communal” solution. Again, put baldly, there are very few who would not
concede the monstrous injustice of confiscating the sculptor’s property,
either by one or more others, or on behalf of the world as a whole. By
what right do they do so? By what right do they appropriate to
themselves the product of the creator’s mind and energy? In this
clear-cut case, the right of the creator to own what he has mixed his
person and labor with would be generally conceded. (Once again, as in
the case of communal ownership of persons, the world communal solution
would, in practice, be reduced to an oligarchy of a *few* others
expropriating the creator’s work *in the name of* “world public”
ownership.)

The main point, however, is that the case of the sculptor is not
qualitatively different from *all* cases of “production.” The man or men
who had extracted the clay from the ground and had sold it to the
sculptor may not be as “creative” as the sculptor, but they too are
“producers,” they too have mixed their ideas and their technological
know-how with the nature-given soil to emerge with a useful product.
They, too, are “producers,” and they too have mixed their labor with
natural materials to transform those materials into more useful goods
and services. These persons, too, are entitled to the ownership of their
products. Where then does the process begin? Again, let us turn to
Locke:

> He that is nourished by the acorns he picked up under an oak, or the
> apples he gathered from the trees in the wood, has certainly
> appropriated them to himself. Nobody can deny but the nourishment is
> his. I ask then, when did they begin to be his? When he digested? or
> when he ate? or when he boiled? or when he brought them home? or when
> he picked them up? And ’tis plain, if the first gathering made them
> not his, nothing else could. That labour put a distinction between
> them and common. That added something to them more than Nature, the
> common mother of all, had done, and so they became his private right.
> And will any one say he had no right to those acorns or apples he thus
> appropriated because he had not the consent of all mankind to make
> them his? Was it a robbery thus to assume to himself what belonged to
> all in common? If such a consent as that was necessary, man had
> starved, notwithstanding the plenty God had given him. ... Thus, the
> grass my horse has bit, the turfs my servant has cut, and the ore I
> have digged in my place, where I have a right to them in common with
> others, become my property without the assignation or consent of any
> body. The labour that was mine, removing them out of that common state
> they were in, hath fixed my property in them.
>
> By making an explicit consent of every commoner necessary to any one’s
> appropriating to himself any part of what is given in common, children
> or servants could not cut the meat which their father or master had
> provided for them in common without assigning to every one his
> peculiar part. Though the water running in the fountain be every
> one’s, yet who can doubt but that in the pitcher is his only who drew
> it out? His labour hath taken it out of the hands of Nature where it
> was common... and hath thereby appropriated it to himself.
>
> Thus the law of reason makes the deer that Indian’s who killed it;
> ’tis allowed to be his goods who hath bestowed his labour upon it,
> though, before, it was the common right of every one. And amongst
> those who are counted the civilized part of mankind... this original
> law of nature for the beginning of property, in what was before
> common, still takes place, and by virtue thereof, what fish any one
> catches in the ocean, that great and still remaining common of
> mankind; or what ambergris any one takes up here is by the labour that
> removes it out of that common state nature left it in, made his
> property who takes that pains about
> it.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn3)^

If every man owns his own person and therefore his own labor, and if by
extension he owns whatever property he has “created” or gathered out of
the previously unused, unowned, “state of nature,” then what of the last
great question: the right to own or control the earth *itself*? In
short, if the gatherer has the right to own the acorns or berries he
picks, or the farmer the right to own his crop of wheat or peaches,
*who* has the right to own the land on which these things have grown? It
is at this point that Henry George and his followers, who have gone all
the way so far with the libertarians, leave the track and deny the
individual’s right to own the piece of land itself, the *ground* on
which these activities have taken place. The Georgists argue that, while
every man should own the goods which he produces or creates, since
Nature or God created the land itself, no individual has the right to
assume ownership of that land. Yet, if the land is to be used at all as
a resource in any sort of efficient manner, it must be owned or
controlled by *someone* or some group, and we are again faced with our
three alternatives: either the land belongs to the first user, the man
who first brings it into production; *or* it belongs to a group of
others; *or* it belongs to the world as a whole, with every individual
owning a quotal part of every acre of land. George’s option for the last
solution hardly solves his moral problem: If the land itself should
belong to God or Nature, then why as it more moral for every acre in the
world to be owned by the world as a whole, than to concede individual
ownership? In practice, again, it is obviously impossible for every
person in the world to exercise effective ownership of his
four-billionth portion (if the world population is, say, four billion)
of every piece of the world’s land surface. In practice, of course, a
small oligarchy would do the controlling and owning, and not the world
as a whole.

But apart from these difficulties in the Georgist position, the
natural-rights justification for the ownership of ground land is the
same as the justification for the original ownership of all other
property. For, as we have seen, no producer *really* “creates” matter;
he takes nature-given matter and transforms it by his labor energy in
accordance with his ideas and vision. But *this* is precisely what the
pioneer—the “homesteader”—does when he brings previously unused land
into his own private ownership. Just as the man who makes steel out of
iron ore transforms that ore out of his know-how and with his energy,
and just as the man who takes the iron out of the ground does the same,
so does the homesteader who clears, fences, cultivates, or builds upon
the land. The homesteader, too, has transformed the character of the
nature-given soil by his labor and his personality. The homesteader is
just as legitimately the owner of the property as the sculptor or the
manufacturer; he is just as much a “producer” as the others.

Furthermore, if the original land is nature- or God-given then so are
the people’s talents, health, and beauty. And just as all these
attributes are given to specific individuals and not to “society,” so
then are land and natural resources. All of these resources are given to
individuals and not to “society,” which is an abstraction that does not
actually exist. There is no existing entity called “society”; there are
only interacting individuals. To say that “society” should own land or
any other property in common, then, must mean that a group of
oligarchs—in practice, government bureaucrats—should own the property,
and at the expense of expropriating the creator or the homesteader who
had originally brought this product into existence.

Moreover, no one can produce *anything* without the cooperation of
original land, if only as standing room. No man can produce or create
anything by his labor alone; he must have the cooperation of land and
other natural raw materials.

Man comes into the world with just himself and the world around him—the
land and natural resources given him by nature. He takes these resources
and transforms them by his labor and mind and energy into goods more
useful to man. Therefore, if an individual cannot own original land,
neither can he in the full sense own any of the fruits of his labor. The
farmer cannot own his wheat crop if he cannot own the land on which the
wheat grows. Now that his labor has been inextricably mixed with the
land, he cannot be deprived of one without being deprived of the other.

Moreover, if a producer is *not* entitled to the fruits of his labor,
who is? It is difficult to see why a newborn Pakistani baby should have
a moral claim to a quotal share of ownership of a piece of Iowa land
that someone has just transformed into a wheatfield—and vice versa of
course for an Iowan baby and a Pakistani farm. Land in its original
state is unused and unowned. Georgists and other land communalists may
claim that the whole world population really “owns” it, but if no one
has yet used it, it is in the real sense owned and controlled by no one.
The pioneer, the homesteader, the first user and transformer of this
land, is the man who first brings this simple valueless thing into
production and social use. It is difficult to see the morality of
depriving him of ownership in favor of people who have never gotten
within a thousand miles of the land, and who may not even know of the
existence of the property over which they are supposed to have a claim.

The moral, natural-rights issue involved here is even clearer if we
consider the case of animals. Animals are “economic land,” since they
are original nature-given resources. Yet will anyone deny full title to
a horse to the man who finds and domesticates it—is this any different
from the acorns and berries that are generally conceded to the gatherer?
Yet in land, too, some homesteader takes the previously “wild,”
undomesticated land, and “tames” it by putting it to productive use.
Mixing his labor with land sites should give him just as clear a title
as in the case of animals. As Locke declared: “As much land as a man
tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the product of, so much
is his property. He by his labour does, as it were, enclose it from the
common.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn4)^

The libertarian theory of property was eloquently summed up by two
nineteenth-century laissez-faire French economists:

> If man acquires rights over things, it is because he is at once
> active, intelligent and free; by his activity he spreads over external
> nature; by his intelligence he governs it, and bends it to his use; by
> his liberty, he establishes between himself and it the relation of
> cause and effect and makes it his own. ...
>
> Where is there, in a civilized country, a clod of earth, a leaf, which
> does not bear this impress of the personality of man? In the town, we
> are surrounded by the works of man; we walk upon a level pavement or a
> beaten road; it is man who made healthy the formerly muddy soil, who
> took from the side of a far-away hill the flint or stone which covers
> it. We live in houses; it is man who has dug the stone from the
> quarry, who has hewn it, who has planed the woods; it is the thought
> of man which has arranged the materials properly and made a building
> of what was before rock and wood. And in the country, the action of
> man is still everywhere present; men have cultivated the soil and
> generations of laborers have mellowed and enriched it; the works of
> man have dammed the rivers and created fertility where the waters had
> brought only desolation. ... Everywhere a powerful hand is divined
> which has moulded matter, and an intelligent will which has adapted
> it... to the satisfaction of the wants of one same being. Nature has
> recognized her master, and man feels that he is at home in nature.
> Nature has been *appropriated* by him for his use; she has become his
> *own*; she is his *property*. This property is legitimate; it
> constitutes a right as sacred for man as is the free exercise of his
> faculties. It is his because it has come entirely from himself, and is
> in no way anything but an emanation from his being. Before him, there
> was scarcely anything but matter; since him, and by him, there is
> interchangeable wealth, that is to say, articles having acquired a
> value by some industry, by manufacture, by handling, by extraction, or
> simply by transportation. From the picture of a great master, which is
> perhaps of all material production that in which matter plays the
> smallest part, to the pail of water which the carrier draws from the
> river and takes to the consumer, wealth, whatever it may be, acquires
> its value only by communicated qualities, and these qualities are part
> of human activity, intelligence, strength. The producer has left a
> fragment of his own person in the thing which has thus become
> valuable, and may hence be regarded as a prolongation of the faculties
> of man acting upon external nature. As a free being he belongs to
> himself; now the cause, that is to say, the productive force, is
> himself; the effect, that is to say, the wealth produced, is still
> himself. Who shall dare contest his title of ownership so clearly
> marked by the seal of his personality? ...
>
> It is then, to the human being, the creator of all wealth, that we
> must come back... it is by labor that man impresses his personality on
> matter. It is labor which cultivates the earth and makes of an
> unoccupied waste an appropriated field; it is labor which makes of an
> untrodden forest a regularly ordered wood; it is labor, or rather, a
> series of labors often executed by a very numerous succession of
> workmen, which brings hemp from seed, thread from hemp, cloth from
> thread, clothing from cloth; which transforms the shapeless pyrite,
> picked up in the mine, into an elegant bronze which adorns some public
> place, and repeats to an entire people the thought of an artist. ...
>
> Property, made manifest by labor, participates in the rights of the
> person whose emanation it is; like him, it is inviolable so long as it
> does not extend so far as to come into collision with another right;
> like him, it is individual, because it has origin in the independence
> of the individual, and because, when several persons have cooperated
> in its formation, the latest possessor has purchased with a value, the
> fruit of his personal labor, the work of all the fellow-laborers who
> have preceded him: this is what is usually the case with manufactured
> articles. When property has passed, by sale or by inheritance, from
> one hand to another, its conditions have not changed; it is still the
> fruit of human liberty manifested by labor, and the holder has the
> rights as the producer who took possession of it by
> right.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn5)^

## SOCIETY AND THE INDIVIDUAL [society-and-the-individual]

We have talked at length of individual rights; but what, it may be
asked, of the “rights of society”? Don’t they supersede the rights of
the mere individual? The libertarian, however, is an individualist; he
believes that one of the prime errors in social theory is to treat
“society” as if it were an actually existing entity. “Society” is
sometimes treated as a superior or quasi-divine figure with overriding
“rights” of its own; at other times as an existing evil which can be
blamed for all the ills of the world. The individualist holds that only
individuals exist, think, feel, choose, and act; and that “society” is
not a living entity but simply a label for a set of interacting
individuals. Treating society as a thing that chooses and acts, then,
serves to obscure the real forces at work. If, in a small community, ten
people band together to rob and expropriate three others then this is
clearly and evidently a case of a group of individuals acting in concert
against another group. In this situation, if the ten people presumed to
refer to themselves as “society” acting in “its” interest, the rationale
would be laughed out of court; even the ten robbers would probably be
too shamefaced to use this sort of argument. But let their size
increase, and this kind of obfuscation becomes rife and succeeds in
duping the public.

The fallacious use of a collective noun like “nation,” similar in this
respect to “society,” has been trenchantly pointed out by the historian
Parker T. Moon:

> When one uses the simple monosyllable “France” one thinks of France as
> a unit, an entity. When... we say “France sent *her* troops to conquer
> Tunis”—we impute not only unit but personality to the country. The
> very words conceal the facts and make international relations a
> glamorous drama in which personalized nations are the actors, and all
> too easily we forget the flesh-and-blood men and women who are the
> true actors... if we had no such word as “France” ... then we should
> more accurately describe the Tunis expedition in some such way as
> this: “A few of these thirty-eight million persons sent thirty
> thousand others to conquer Tunis.” This way of putting the fact
> immediately suggests a question, or rather a series of questions. Who
> were the “few”? Why did they send the thirty thousand to Tunis? And
> why did these obey? Empire-building is done not by “nations,” but by
> men. The problem before us is to discover the men, the active,
> interested minorities in each nation, who are directly interested in
> imperialism and then to analyze the reasons why the majorities pay the
> expense and fight the war necessitated by imperialist
> expansion.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn6)^

The individualist view of “society” has been summed up in the phrase:
*“Society” is everyone but yourself.* Put thus bluntly, this analysis
can be used to consider those cases where “society” is treated, not only
as a superhero with superrights, but as a supervillain on whose
shoulders massive blame is placed. Consider the typical view that not
the individual criminal, but “society,” is responsible for his crime.
Take, for example, the case where Smith robs or murders Jones. The
“old-fashioned” view is that Smith is responsible for his act. The
modern liberal counters that “society” is responsible. This sounds both
sophisticated and humanitarian, until we apply the individualist
perspective. Then we see that what liberals are *really* saying is that
*everyone but* Smith, including of course the victim Jones, is
responsible for the crime. Put this baldly, almost everyone would
recognize the absurdity of this position. But conjuring up the fictive
entity “society” obfuscates this process. As the sociologist Arnold W.
Green puts it: “It would follow, then, that if society is responsible
for crime, and criminals are not responsible for crime, only those
members of society who do not commit crime can be held responsible for
crime. Nonsense this obvious can be circumvented only by conjuring up
society as devil, as evil being apart from people and what they
do.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn7)^

The great American libertarian writer Frank Chodorov stressed this view
of society when he wrote that “Society Are People.”

> Society is a collective concept and nothing else; it is a convenience
> for designating a number of people. So, too, is family or crowd or
> gang, or any other name we give to an agglomeration of persons.
> Society... is not an extra “person”; if the census totals a hundred
> million, that’s all there are, not one more, for there cannot be any
> accretion to Society except by procreation. The concept of Society as
> a metaphysical person falls flat when we observe that Society
> disappears when the component parts disperse; as in the case of a
> “ghost town” or of a civilization we learn about by the artifacts they
> left behind. When the individuals disappear so does the whole. The
> whole has no separate existence. Using the collective noun with a
> singular verb leads us into a trap of the imagination; we are prone to
> personalize the collectivity and to think of it as having a body and a
> psyche of its own.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap02_fn8)^

## FREE EXCHANGE AND FREE CONTRACT [free-exchange-and-free-contract]

The central core of the libertarian creed, then, is to establish the
absolute right to private property of every man: first, in his own body,
and second, in the previously unused natural resources which he first
transforms by his labor. These two axioms, the right of self-ownership
and the right to “homestead,” establish the complete set of principles
of the libertarian system. The entire libertarian doctrine then becomes
the spinning out and the application of all the implications of this
central doctrine. For example, a man, *X*, owns his own person and labor
and the farm he clears on which he grows wheat. Another man, *Y*, owns
the fish he catches; a third man, *Z*, owns the cabbages he has grown
and the land under it. But if a man owns anything, he then has the right
to *give away* or *exchange* these property titles to someone else,
after which point the other person also has absolute property title.
From this corollary right to private property stems the basic
justification for free contract and for the free-market economy. Thus,
if *X* grows wheat, he may and probably will agree to exchange some of
that wheat for some of the fish caught by *Y* or for some of the
cabbages grown by *Z*. With both *X* and *Y* making voluntary agreements
to exchange property titles (or *Y* and *Z*, or *X* and *Z*) the
property then becomes with equal legitimacy the property of the other
person. If *X* exchanges wheat for *Y*’s fish, then that fish becomes
*X*’s property to do with as he wishes, and the wheat becomes *Y*’s
property in precisely the same way.

Further, a man may exchange not only the tangible objects he owns but
also his own labor, which of course he owns as well. Thus, *Z* may sell
his labor services of teaching farmer *X*’s children in return for some
of the farmer’s produce.

It so happens that the free-market economy, and the specialization and
division of labor it implies, is by far the most productive form of
economy known to man, and has been responsible for industrialization and
for the modern economy on which civilization has been built. This is a
fortunate utilitarian result of the free market, but it is not, to the
libertarian, the *prime* reason for his support of this system. That
prime reason is moral and is rooted in the natural-rights defense of
private property we have developed above. Even if a society of despotism
and systematic invasion of rights could be shown to be more productive
than what Adam Smith called “the system of natural liberty,” the
libertarian would support this system. Fortunately, as in so many other
areas, the utilitarian and the moral, natural rights and general
prosperity, go hand in hand.

The developed-market economy, as complex as the system appears to be on
the surface, is nothing more than a vast network of voluntary and
mutually agreed-upon two-person exchanges such as we have shown to occur
between wheat and cabbage farmers, or between the farmer and the
teacher. Thus, when I buy a newspaper for a dime, a mutually beneficial
two-person exchange takes place: I transfer my ownership of the dime to
the newsdealer and he transfers ownership of the paper to me. We do this
because, under the division of labor, I calculate that the paper is
worth more to me than the dime, while the newsdealer prefers the dime to
keeping the paper. Or, when I teach at a university, I estimate that I
prefer my salary to not expending my labor of teaching, while the
university authorities calculate that they prefer gaining my teaching
services to not paying me the money. If the newsdealer insisted on
charging 50¢ for the paper, I might well decide that it isn’t worth the
price; similarly, if I should insist on triple my present salary, the
university might well decide to dispense with my services.

Many people are willing to concede the justice and propriety of property
rights and the free-market economy, to concede that the farmer should be
able to charge whatever his wheat will bring from consumers or the
worker to reap whatever others are willing to pay for his services. But
they balk at one point: inheritance. If Willie Stargell is ten times as
good and “productive” a ball player as Joe Jack, they are willing to
concede the justice of Stargell’s earning ten times the amount; but
what, they ask, is the justification for someone whose only merit is
being born a Rockefeller inheriting far more wealth than someone born a
Rothbard? The libertarian answer is to concentrate *not* on the
recipient, the child Rockefeller or the child Rothbard, but to
concentrate on the *giver*, the man who bestows the inheritance. For if
Smith and Jones and Stargell have the right to their labor and property
and to exchange the titles to this property for the similar property of
others, they also have the right to *give* their property to whomever
they wish. And of course most such gifts consist of the gifts of the
property owners to their children—in short, inheritance. If Willie
Stargell owns his labor and the money he earns from it, then he has the
right to give that money to the baby Stargell.

In the developed free-market economy, then, the farmer exchanges the
wheat for money; the wheat is bought by the miller who processes and
transforms the wheat into flour; the miller sells the flour to the baker
who produces bread; the baker sells the bread to the wholesaler, who in
turn sells it to the retailer, who finally sells it to the consumer. And
at each step of the way, the producer may hire the labor services of the
workers in exchange for money. How “money” enters the equation is a
complex process; but it should be clear that *conceptually* the use of
money is equivalent to any single or group of useful commodities that
are exchanged for the wheat, flour, etc. Instead of money, the commodity
exchanged could be cloth, iron, or whatever. At each step of the way,
mutually beneficial exchanges of property titles are agreed upon and
transacted.

We are now in a position to see how the libertarian defines the concept
of “freedom” or “liberty.” Freedom is a condition in which a person’s
ownership rights in his own body and his legitimate material property
are *not* invaded, are not aggressed against. A man who steals another
man’s property is invading and restricting the victim’s freedom, as does
the man who beats another over the head. Freedom and unrestricted
property right go hand in hand. On the other hand, to the libertarian,
“crime” is an act of aggression against a man’s property right, either
in his own person or his materially owned objects. Crime is an invasion,
by the use of violence, against a man’s property and therefore against
his liberty. “Slavery”—the opposite of freedom—is a condition in which
the slave has little or no right of self-ownership; his person and his
produce are systematically expropriated by his master by the use of
violence.

The libertarian, then, is clearly an individualist but *not* an
egalitarian. The only “equality” he would advocate is the equal right of
every man to the property in his own person, to the property in the
unused resources he “homesteads,” and to the property of others he has
acquired either through voluntary exchange or gift.

## PROPERTY RIGHTS AND “HUMAN RIGHTS” [property-rights-and-human-rights]

Liberals will generally concede the right of every individual to his
“personal liberty,” to his freedom to think, speak, write, and engage in
such personal “exchanges” as sexual activity between “consenting
adults.” In short, the liberal attempts to uphold the individual’s right
to the ownership of his own body, but then denies his right to
“property,” i.e., to the ownership of material objects. Hence, the
typical liberal dichotomy between “human rights,” which he upholds, and
“property rights,” which he rejects. Yet the two, according to the
libertarian, are inextricably intertwined; they stand or fall together.

Take, for example, the liberal socialist who advocates government
ownership of all the “means of production” while upholding the “human”
right of freedom of speech or press. How is this “human” right to be
exercised if the individuals constituting the public are denied their
right to ownership of property? If, for example, the government owns all
the newsprint and all the printing shops, how is the right to a free
press to be exercised? If the government owns all the newsprint, it then
necessarily has the right and the power to allocate that newsprint, and
someone’s “right to a free press” becomes a mockery if the government
decides not to allocate newsprint in his direction. And since the
government must allocate scarce newsprint in *some* way, the right to a
free press of, say, minorities or “subversive” antisocialists will get
short shrift indeed. The same is true for the “right to free speech” if
the government owns all the assembly halls, and therefore allocates
those halls as it sees fit. Or, for example, if the government of Soviet
Russia, being atheistic, decides not to allocate many scarce resources
to the production of matzohs, for Orthodox Jews the “freedom of
religion” becomes a mockery; but again, the Soviet government can always
rebut that Orthodox Jews are a small minority and that capital equipment
should not be diverted to matzoh production.

The basic flaw in the liberal separation of “human rights” and “property
rights” is that people are treated as ethereal abstractions. If a man
has the right to self-ownership, to the control of his life, then in the
real world he must also have the right to sustain his life by grappling
with and transforming resources; he must be able to own the ground and
the resources on which he stands and which he must use. In short, to
sustain his “human right”—or his property rights in his own person—he
must also have the property right in the material world, in the objects
which he produces. Property rights *are* human rights, and are essential
to the human rights which liberals attempt to maintain. The human right
of a free press depends upon the human right of private property in
newsprint.

In fact, there *are no* human rights that are separable from property
rights. The human right of free speech is simply the property right to
hire an assembly hall from the owners, or to own one oneself; the human
right of a free press is the property right to buy materials and then
print leaflets or books and to sell them to those who are willing to
buy. There is no extra “right of free speech” or free press beyond the
property rights we can enumerate in any given case. And furthermore,
discovering and identifying the property rights involved will resolve
any apparent conflicts of rights that may crop up.

Consider, for example, the classic example where liberals generally
concede that a person’s “right of freedom of speech” must be curbed in
the name of the “public interest”: Justice Holmes’ famous dictum that no
one has the right to cry “fire” falsely in a crowded theater. Holmes and
his followers have used this illustration again and again to prove the
supposed necessity for all rights to be relative and tentative rather
than precise and absolute.

But the problem here is *not* that rights cannot be pushed too far but
that the whole case is discussed in terms of a vague and wooly “freedom
of speech” rather than in terms of the rights of private property.
Suppose we analyze the problem under the aspect of property rights. The
fellow who brings on a riot by falsely shouting “fire” in a crowded
theater is, necessarily, either the owner of the theater (or the owner’s
agent) or a paying patron. If he is the owner, then he has committed
fraud on his customers. He has taken their money in exchange for a
promise to put on a movie or play, and now, instead, he disrupts the
show by falsely shouting “fire” and breaking up the performance. He has
thus welshed on his contractual obligation, and has thereby stolen the
property—the money—of his patrons and has violated their property
rights.

Suppose, on the other hand, that the shouter is a patron and not the
owner. In that case, he is violating the property right of the owner—as
well as of the other guests to their paidfor performance. As a guest, he
has gained access to the property on certain terms, including an
obligation not to violate the owner’s property or to disrupt the
performance the owner is putting on. His malicious act, therefore,
violates the property rights of the theater owner and of all the other
patrons.

There is no need, therefore, for individual rights to be restricted in
the case of the false shouter of “fire.” The rights of the individual
are *still* absolute; but they are *property* rights. The fellow who
maliciously cried “fire” in a crowded theater is indeed a criminal, but
*not* because his so-called “right of free speech” must be pragmatically
restricted on behalf of the “public good”; he is a criminal because he
has clearly and obviously violated the property rights of another
person.

# 3 THE STATE [9-chap03.html#page55]

## THE STATE AS AGGRESSOR [the-state-as-aggressor]

The central thrust of libertarian thought, then, is to oppose any and
all aggression against the property rights of individuals in their own
persons and in the material objects they have voluntarily acquired.
While individual and gangs of criminals are of course opposed, there is
nothing unique here to the libertarian creed, since almost all persons
and schools of thought oppose the exercise of random violence against
persons and property.

There is, however, a difference of emphasis on the part of libertarians
even in this universally accepted area of defending people against
crime. In the libertarian society there would be no “district attorney”
who prosecutes criminals in the name of a nonexistent “society,” even
against the wishes of the victim of crime. The victim would himself
decide whether to press charges. Furthermore, as another side to the
same coin, in a libertarian world the victim would be able to press suit
against a wrongdoer without having to convince the same district
attorney that he should proceed. Moreover, in the system of criminal
punishment in the libertarian world, the emphasis would never be, as it
is now, on “society’s” jailing the criminal; the emphasis would
necessarily be on compelling the criminal to make restitution to the
victim of his crime. The present system, in which the victim is not
recompensed but instead has to pay taxes to support the incarceration of
his own attacker—would be evident nonsense in a world that focuses on
the defense of property rights and therefore on the victim of crime.

Furthermore, while most libertarians are not pacifists, they would not
join the present system in interfering with people’s *right* to be
pacifists. Thus, suppose that Jones, a pacifist, is aggressed against by
Smith, a criminal. If Jones, as the result of his beliefs, is against
defending himself by the use of violence and is therefore opposed to any
prosecution of crime, then Jones will simply fail to prosecute, and that
will be the end of it. There will be no governmental machinery that
pursues and tries criminals even against the wishes of the victim.

But the critical difference between libertarians and other people is not
in the area of private crime; the critical difference is their view of
the role of the State—the government. For libertarians regard the State
as the supreme, the eternal, the best organized aggressor against the
persons and property of the mass of the public. *All* States everywhere,
whether democratic, dictatorial, or monarchical, whether red, white,
blue, or brown.

The State! Always and ever the government and its rulers and operators
have been considered above the general moral law. The “Pentagon Papers”
are only one recent instance among innumerable instances in history of
men, most of whom are perfectly honorable in their private lives, who
lie in their teeth before the public. Why? For “reasons of State.”
Service to the State is supposed to excuse all actions that would be
considered immoral or criminal if committed by “private” citizens. The
distinctive feature of libertarians is that they coolly and
uncompromisingly apply the general moral law to people acting in their
roles as members of the State apparatus. Libertarians make no
exceptions. For centuries, the State (or more strictly, individuals
acting in their roles as “members of the government”) has cloaked its
criminal activity in highsounding rhetoric. For centuries the State has
committed mass murder and called it “war”; then ennobled the mass
slaughter that “war” involves. For centuries the State has enslaved
people into its armed battalions and called it “conscription” in the
“national service.” For centuries the State has robbed people at bayonet
point and called it “taxation.” In fact, if you wish to know how
libertarians regard the State and any of its acts, simply think of the
State as a criminal band, and all of the libertarian attitudes will
logically fall into place.

Let us consider, for example, what it is that sharply distinguishes
government from all other organizations in society. Many political
scientists and sociologists have blurred this vital distinction, and
refer to all organizations and groups as hierarchical, structured,
“governmental,” etc. Left-wing anarchists, for example, will oppose
equally government *and* private organizations such as corporations on
the ground that each is equally “elitist” and “coercive.” But the
“rightist” libertarian is not opposed to inequality, and his concept of
“coercion” applies only to the use of violence. The libertarian sees a
crucial distinction between government, whether central, state, or
local, and all other institutions in society. Or rather, two crucial
distinctions. First, every other person or group receives its income by
voluntary payment: either by voluntary contribution or gift (such as the
local community chest or bridge club), *or* by voluntary purchase of its
goods or services on the market (i.e., grocery store owner, baseball
player, steel manufacturer, etc.). *Only* the government obtains its
income by coercion and violence—i.e., by the direct threat of
confiscation or imprisonment if payment is not forthcoming. This coerced
levy is “taxation.” A second distinction is that, apart from criminal
outlaws, *only* the government can use its funds to commit violence
against its own or any other subjects; *only* the government can
prohibit pornography, compel a religious observance, or put people in
jail for selling goods at a higher price than the government deems fit.
Both distinctions, of course, can be summed up as: only the government,
in society, is empowered to aggress against the property rights of its
subjects, whether to extract revenue, to impose its moral code, or to
kill those with whom it disagrees. Furthermore, any and all governments,
even the least despotic, have always obtained the bulk of their income
from the coercive taxing power. And historically, by far the
overwhelming portion of all enslavement and murder in the history of the
world has come from the hands of government. And since we have seen that
the central thrust of the libertarian is to oppose all aggression
against the rights of person and property, the libertarian necessarily
opposes the institution of the State as the inherent and overwhelmingly
the most important enemy of those precious rights.

There is another reason why State aggression has been far more important
than private, a reason apart from the greater organization and central
mobilizing of resources that the rulers of the State can impose. The
reason is the absence of any check upon State depredation, a check that
does exist when we have to worry about muggers or the Mafia. To guard
against private criminals we have been able to turn to the State and its
police; but who can guard us against the State itself? No one. For
another critical distinction of the State is that it compels the
monopolization of the service of protection; the State arrogates to
itself a virtual monopoly of violence and of ultimate decision-making in
society. If we don’t like the decisions of the State courts, for
example, there are no other agencies of protection to which we may turn.

It is true that, in the United States, at least, we have a constitution
that imposes strict limits on some powers of government. But, as we have
discovered in the past century, no constitution can interpret or enforce
itself; it must be interpreted by *men*. And if the ultimate power to
interpret a constitution is given to the government’s own Supreme Court,
then the inevitable tendency is for the Court to continue to place its
imprimatur on ever-broader powers for its own government. Furthermore,
the highly touted “checks and balances” and “separation of powers” in
the American government are flimsy indeed, since in the final analysis
all of these divisions are part of the same government and are governed
by the same set of rulers.

One of America’s most brilliant political theorists, John C. Calhoun,
wrote prophetically of the inherent tendency of a State to break through
the limits of its written constitution:

> A written constitution certainly has many and considerable advantages,
> but it is a great mistake to suppose that the mere insertion of
> provisions to restrict and limit the powers of the government, without
> investing those for whose protection they are inserted with the means
> of enforcing their observance, will be sufficient to prevent the major
> and dominant party from abusing its powers. Being the party in
> possession of the government, they will... be in favor of the powers
> granted by the constitution and opposed to the restrictions intended
> to limit them. As the major and dominant parties, they will have no
> need of these restrictions for their protection. ...
>
> The minor or weaker party on the contrary, would take the opposite
> direction and regard them as essential to their protection against the
> dominant party. ... But where there are no means by which they could
> compel the major party to observe the restrictions, the only resort
> left them would be a strict construction of the constitution. ... To
> this the major party would oppose a liberal construction—one which
> would give to the words of the grant the broadest meaning of which
> they were susceptible. It would then be construction against
> construction—the one to contract and the other to enlarge the powers
> of the government to the utmost. But of what possible avail could the
> strict construction of the minor party be, against the liberal
> interpretation of the major, when the one would have all the powers of
> the government to carry its construction into effect and the other be
> deprived of all means of enforcing its construction? In a contest so
> unequal, the result would not be doubtful. The party in favor of the
> restrictions would be overpowered. ... The end of the contest would be
> the subversion of the constitution... the restrictions would
> ultimately be annulled and the government be converted into one of
> unlimited powers.
>
> Nor would the division of government into separate and, as it regards
> each other, independent departments prevent this result... as each and
> all the departments—and, of course, the entire government—would be
> under the control of the numerical majority, it is too clear to
> require explanation that a mere distribution of its powers among its
> agents or representatives could do little or nothing to counteract its
> tendency to oppression and abuse of
> power.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn1)^

But why worry about the weakness of limits on governmental power?
Especially in a “democracy,” in the phrase so often used by American
liberals in their heyday before the mid-1960s when doubts began to creep
into the liberal utopia: “Are *we* not the government?” In the phrase
“we are the government,” the useful collective term “we” has enabled an
ideological camouflage to be thrown over the naked exploitative reality
of political life. For if *we* truly *are* the government, then
*anything* a government does to an individual is not only just and not
tyrannical; it is also “voluntary” on the part of the individual
concerned. If the government has incurred a huge public debt which must
be paid by taxing one group on behalf of another, this reality of burden
is conveniently obscured by blithely saying that “we owe it to
ourselves” (but *who* are the “we” and *who* the “ourselves”?). If the
government drafts a man, or even throws him into jail for dissident
opinions, then he is only “doing it to himself” and therefore nothing
improper has occurred. Under this reasoning, then, Jews murdered by the
Nazi government were *not* murdered; they must have “committed suicide,”
since they *were* the government (which was democratically chosen), and
therefore anything the government did to them was only voluntary on
their part. But there is no way out of such grotesqueries for those
supporters of government who see the State merely as a benevolent and
voluntary agent of the public.

And so we must conclude that “we” are *not* the government; the
government is *not* “us.” The government does not in any accurate sense
“represent” the majority of the people, but even if it did, even if 90
percent of the people decided to murder or enslave the other 10 percent,
this would *still* be murder and slavery, and would not be voluntary
suicide or enslavement on the part of the oppressed minority. Crime is
crime, aggression against rights is aggression, no matter how many
citizens agree to the oppression. There is nothing sacrosanct about the
majority; the lynch mob, too, is the majority in its own domain.

But while, as in the lynch mob, the majority can become actively
tyrannical and aggressive, the normal and continuing condition of the
State is *oligarchic* rule: rule by a coercive elite which has managed
to gain control of the State machinery. There are two basic reasons for
this: one is the inequality and division of labor inherent in the nature
of man, which gives rise to an “Iron Law of Oligarchy” in all of man’s
activities; and second is the parasitic nature of the State enterprise
itself.

We have said that the individualist is not an egalitarian. Part of the
reason for this is the individualist’s insight into the vast diversity
and individuality within mankind, a diversity that has the chance to
flower and expand as civilization and living standards progress.
Individuals differ in ability and in interest both within and between
occupations; and hence, in all occupations and walks of life, whether it
be steel production or the organization of a bridge club, leadership in
the activity will inevitably be assumed by a relative handful of the
most able and energetic, while the remaining majority will form
themselves into rank-and-file followers. This truth applies to all
activities, whether they are beneficial or malevolent (as in criminal
organizations). Indeed, the discovery of the Iron Law of Oligarchy was
made by the Italian sociologist Robert Michels, who found that the
Social Democratic Party of Germany, despite its rhetorical commitment to
egalitarianism, was rigidly oligarchical and hierarchical in its actual
functioning.

A second basic reason for the oligarchic rule of the State is its
parasitic nature—the fact that it lives coercively off the production of
the citizenry. To be successful to its practitioners, the fruits of
parasitic exploitation must be confined to a relative minority,
otherwise a meaningless plunder of all by all would result in no gains
for anyone. Nowhere has the coercive and parasitic nature of the State
been more clearly limned than by the great late nineteenth-century
German sociologist, Franz Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer pointed out that
there are two and only two mutually exclusive means for man to obtain
wealth. One, the method of production and voluntary exchange, the method
of the free market, Oppenheimer termed the “economic means”; the other,
the method of robbery by the use of violence, he called the “political
means.” The political means is clearly parasitic, for it requires
previous production for the exploiters to confiscate, and it subtracts
from instead of adding to the total production in society. Oppenheimer
then proceeded to define the State as the “organization of the political
means”—the systematization of the predatory process over a given
territorial area.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn2)^

In short, private crime is, at best, sporadic and uncertain; the
parasitism is ephemeral, and the coercive, parasitic lifeline can be cut
at any time by the resistance of the victims. The State provides a
legal, orderly, systematic channel for predation on the property of the
producers; it makes certain, secure, and relatively “peaceful” the
lifeline of the parasitic caste in society. The great libertarian writer
Albert Jay Nock wrote vividly that “the State claims and exercises the
monopoly of crime. ... It forbids private murder, but itself organizes
murder on a colossal scale. It punishes private theft, but itself lays
unscrupulous hands on anything it wants, whether the property of citizen
or of alien.”^[3](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn3)^

At first, of course, it is startling for someone to consider taxation as
robbery, and therefore government as a band of robbers. But anyone who
persists in thinking of taxation as in some sense a “voluntary” payment
can see what happens if he chooses not to pay. The great economist
Joseph Schumpeter, himself by no means a libertarian, wrote that “the
state has been living on a revenue which was being produced in the
private sphere for private purposes and had to be deflected from these
purposes by political force. The theory which construes taxes on the
analogy of club dues or of the purchase of the services of, say, a
doctor only proves how far removed this part of the social sciences is
from scientific habits of mind.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn4)^ The
eminent Viennese “legal positivist” Hans Kelsen attempted, in his
treatise, *The General Theory of Law and the State*, to establish a
political theory and justification of the State, on a strictly
“scientific” and value-free basis. What happened is that early in the
book, he came to the crucial stickingpoint, the *pons asinorum* of
political philosophy: *What* distinguishes the edicts of the State from
the commands of a bandit gang? Kelsen’s answer was simply to say that
the decrees of the State are “valid,” and to proceed happily from there,
without bothering to define or explain this concept of “validity.”
Indeed, it would be a useful exercise for nonlibertarians to ponder this
question: *How* can you define taxation in a way which makes it
different from robbery?

To the great nineteenth-century individualist anarchist—and
constitutional lawyer—Lysander Spooner, there was no problem in finding
the answer. Spooner’s analysis of the State as robber group is perhaps
the most devastating ever written:

> It is true that the *theory* of our Constitution is, that all taxes
> are paid voluntarily; that our government is a mutual insurance
> company, voluntarily entered into by the people with each other. ...
>
> But this theory of our government is wholly different from the
> practical fact. The fact is that the government, like a highwayman,
> say to a man: “Your money, or your life.” And many, if not most, taxes
> are paid under the compulsion of that threat.
>
> The government does not, indeed, waylay a man in a lonely place,
> spring upon him from the roadside, and holding a pistol to his head,
> proceed to rifle his pockets. But the robbery is none the less a
> robbery on that account; and it is far more dastardly and shameful.
>
> The highwayman takes solely upon himself the responsibility, danger,
> and crime of his own act. He does not pretend that he has any rightful
> claim to your money, or that he intends to use it for your own
> benefit. He does not pretend to be anything but a robber. He has not
> acquired impudence enough to profess to be merely a “protector,” and
> that he takes men’s money against their will, merely to enable him to
> “protect” those infatuated travellers, who feel perfectly able to
> protect themselves, or do not appreciate his peculiar system of
> protection. He is too sensible a man to make such professions as
> these. Furthermore, having taken your money, he leaves you, as you
> wish him to do. He does not persist in following you on the road,
> against your will; assuming to be your rightful “sovereign,” on
> account of the “protection” he affords you. He does not keep
> “protecting” you, by commanding you to bow down and serve him; by
> requiring you to do this, and forbidding you to do that; by robbing
> you of more money as often as he finds it for his interest or pleasure
> to do so; and by branding you as a rebel, a traitor, and an enemy to
> your country, and shooting you down without mercy, if you dispute his
> authority, or resist his demands. He is too much of a gentleman to be
> guilty of such impostures, and insults, and villainies as these. In
> short, he does not, in addition to robbing you, attempt to make you
> either his dupe or his slave.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn5)^

If the State is a group of plunderers, *who* then constitutes the State?
Clearly, the ruling elite consists at any time of (a) the full-time
*apparatus*—the kings, politicians, and bureaucrats who man and operate
the State; and (b) the groups who have maneuvered to gain privileges,
subsidies, and benefices from the State. The remainder of society
constitutes the ruled. It was, again, John C. Calhoun who saw with
crystal clarity that, no matter how small the power of government, no
matter how low the tax burden or how equal its distribution, the very
nature of government creates two unequal and inherently conflicting
classes in society: those who, on net, *pay* the taxes (the
“tax-payers”), and those who, on net, *live off* taxes (the
“tax-consumers”). Suppose that the government imposes a low and
seemingly equally distributed tax to pay for building a dam. This very
act takes money from most of the public to pay it out to net
“tax-consumers”: the bureaucrats who run the operation, the contractors
and workers who build the dam, etc. And the greater the scope of
government decision-making, the greater its fiscal burdens, Calhoun went
on, the greater the burden and the artificial inequality it imposes
between these two classes:

> Few, comparatively, as they are, the agents and employees of the
> government constitute that portion of the community who are the
> exclusive recipients of the proceeds of the taxes. Whatever amount is
> taken from the community in the form of taxes, if not lost, goes to
> them in the shape of expenditures or disbursements. The
> two—disbursement and taxation—constitute the fiscal action of the
> government. They are correlatives. What the one takes from the
> community under the name of taxes is transferred to the portion of the
> community who are the recipients under that of disbursements. But as
> the recipients constitute only a portion of the community, it follows,
> taking the two parts of the fiscal process together, that its action
> must be unequal between the payers of the taxes and the recipients of
> their proceeds. Nor can it be otherwise; unless what is collected from
> each individual in the shape of taxes shall be returned to him in that
> of disbursements, which would make the process nugatory and absurd.
> ...
>
> The necessary result, then, of the unequal fiscal action of the
> government is to divide the community into two great classes: one
> consisting of those who, in reality, pay the taxes and, of course,
> bear exclusively the burden of supporting the government; and the
> other, of those who are the recipients of their proceeds through
> disbursements, and who are, in fact, supported by the government; or,
> in fewer words, to divide it into tax-payers and tax-consumers.
>
> But the effect of this is to place them in antagonistic relations in
> reference to the fiscal action of the government—and the entire course
> of policy therewith connected. For the greater the taxes and
> disbursements, the greater the gain of the one and the loss of the
> other, and vice versa. ... The effect, then, of every increase is to
> enrich and strengthen the one, and impoverish and weaken the
> other.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn6)^

If states have everywhere been run by an oligarchic group of predators,
how have they been able to maintain their rule over the mass of the
population? The answer, as the philosopher David Hume pointed out over
two centuries ago, is that in the long run *every* government, no matter
how dictatorial, rests on the support of the majority of its subjects.
Now this does not of course render these governments “voluntary,” since
the very existence of the tax and other coercive powers shows how much
compulsion the State must exercise. Nor does the majority support have
to be eager and enthusiastic approval; it could well be mere passive
acquiescence and resignation. The conjunction in the famous phrase
“death and taxes” implies a passive and resigned acceptance to the
assumed inevitability of the State and its taxation.

The tax-consumers, the groups that benefit from the operations of the
State, will of course be eager rather than passive followers of the
State mechanism. But these are only a minority. How is the compliance
and acquiescence of the mass of the population to be secured? Here we
come to the central problem of political philosophy—that branch of
philosophy that deals with politics, the exercise of regularized
violence: the mystery of civil obedience. Why do people obey the edicts
and depredations of the ruling elite? Conservative writer James Burnham,
who is the reverse of libertarian, put the problem very clearly,
admitting that there is no rational justification for civil obedience:
“Neither the source nor the justification of government can be put in
wholly rational terms... why should I accept the hereditary or
democratic or any other principle of legitimacy? Why should a principle
justify the rule of that man over me?” His own answer is hardly
calculated to convince many others: “I accept the principle, well...
because I do, because that is the way it is and has
been.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn7)^ But suppose that one does *not*
accept the principle; what will the “way” be then? And why have the bulk
of subjects agreed to accept it?

## THE STATE AND THE INTELLECTUALS [9-chap03.html#page67]

The answer is that, since the early origins of the State, its rulers
have always turned, as a necessary bolster to their rule, to an alliance
with society’s class of intellectuals. The masses do not create their
own abstract ideas, or indeed think through these ideas independently;
they follow passively the ideas adopted and promulgated by the body of
intellectuals, who become the effective “opinion moulders” in society.
And since it is precisely a moulding of opinion on behalf of the rulers
that the State almost desperately needs, this forms a firm basis for the
age-old alliance of the intellectuals and the ruling classes of the
State. The alliance is based on a *quid pro quo*: on the one hand, the
intellectuals spread among the masses the idea that the State and its
rulers are wise, good, sometimes divine, and at the very least
inevitable and better than any conceivable alternatives. In return for
this panoply of ideology, the State incorporates the intellectuals as
part of the ruling elite, granting them power, status, prestige, and
material security. Furthermore, intellectuals are needed to staff the
bureaucracy and to “plan” the economy and society.

Before the modern era, particularly potent among the intellectual
handmaidens of the State was the priestly caste, cementing the powerful
and terrible alliance of warrior chief and medicine man, of Throne and
Altar. The State “established” the Church and conferred upon it power,
prestige, and wealth extracted from its subjects. In return, the Church
anointed the State with divine sanction and inculcated this sanction
into the populace. In the modern era, when theocratic arguments have
lost much of their lustre among the public, the intellectuals have posed
as the scientific cadre of “experts” and have been busy informing the
hapless public that political affairs, foreign and domestic, are much
too complex for the average person to bother his head about. Only the
State and its corps of intellectual experts, planners, scientists,
economists, and “national security managers” can possibly hope to deal
with these problems. The role of the masses, even in “democracies,” is
to ratify and assent to the decisions of their knowledgeable rulers.

Historically, the union of Church and State, of Throne and Altar, has
been the most effective device for inducing obedience and support among
the subjects. Burnham attests to the power of myth and mystery in
inducing support when he writes that, “In ancient times, before the
illusions of science had corrupted traditional wisdom, the founders of
Cities were known to be gods or
demi-gods.”^[8](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn8)^ To the established
priestcraft, the ruler was either anointed by God or, in the case of the
absolute rule of many Oriental despotisms, was even himself God; hence,
any questioning or resistance to his rule would be blasphemy.

Many and subtle are the ideological weapons the State and its
intellectuals have used over the centuries to induce their subjects to
accept their rule. One excellent weapon has been the power of
*tradition*. The longer lasting the rule of any given State, the more
powerful this weapon; for then the X-Dynasty or the Y-State has the
seeming weight of centuries of tradition behind it. Worship of one’s
ancestors then becomes a none-too-subtle means of cultivating worship of
one’s ancestral rulers. The force of tradition is, of course, bolstered
by ancient *habit*, which confirms the subjects in the seeming propriety
and legitimacy of the rule under which they live. Thus, the political
theorist Bertrand De Jouvenel has written:

> The essential reason for obedience is that it has become a habit of
> the species. ... Power is for us a fact of nature. From the earliest
> days of recorded history it has always presided over human
> destinies... the authorities which ruled... in former times did not
> disappear without bequeathing to their successors their privilege nor
> without leaving in men’s minds imprints which are cumulative in their
> effect. The succession of governments which, in the course of
> centuries, rule the same society may be looked on as one underlying
> government which takes on continuous
> accretions.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn9)^

Another potent ideological force is for the State to deprecate the
*individual* and exalt either the past or the present collectivity of
society. Any isolated voice, any raiser of new doubts, can then be
attacked as a profane violator of the wisdom of his ancestors. Moreover,
any new idea, much less any new *critical* idea, must necessarily
*begin* as a small minority opinion. Therefore, in order to ward off any
potentially dangerous idea from threatening majority acceptance of its
rule, the State will try to nip the new idea in the bud by ridiculing
any view that sets itself against mass opinion. The ways in which the
State rulers in ancient Chinese despotisms used religion as a method of
binding the individual to the State-run society were summarized by
Norman Jacobs:

> Chinese religion is a social religion, seeking to solve the problems
> of social interests, not individual interests. ... Religion is
> essentially a force of impersonal social adjustment and control—rather
> than a medium for the personal solutions of the individual—and social
> adjustment and control are effected through education and reverence
> for superiors. ... Reverence for superiors—superior in age and hence
> in education and experience—is the ethical foundation of social
> adjustment and control. ... In China, the interrelationship of
> political authority with orthodox religion equated heterodoxy with
> political error. The orthodox religion was particularly active in
> persecuting and destroying heterodox sects; in this it was backed by
> the secular power.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn10)^

The general tendency of government to seek out and thwart any heterodox
views was outlined, in typically witty and delightful style, by the
libertarian writer H.L. Mencken:

> All \[that government\] can see in an original idea is potential
> change, and hence an invasion of its prerogatives. The most dangerous
> man, to any government, is the man who is able to think things out for
> himself, without regard to the prevailing superstitions and taboos.
> Almost inevitably he comes to the conclusion that the government he
> lives under is dishonest, insane and intolerable, and so, if he is
> romantic, he tries to change it. And even if he is not romantic
> personally he is very apt to spread discontent among those who
> are.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn11)^

It is also particularly important for the State to make its rule seem
*inevitable*: even if its reign is disliked, as it often is, it will
then be met with the passive resignation expressed in the familiar
coupling of “death and taxes.” One method is to bring to its side
historical determinism: if X-State rules us, then this has been
inevitably decreed for us by the Inexorable Laws of History (or the
Divine Will, or the Absolute, or the Material Productive Forces), and
nothing that any puny individuals may do can change the inevitable. It
is also important for the State to inculcate in its subjects an aversion
to any outcropping of what is now called “a conspiracy theory of
history.” For a search for “conspiracies,” as misguided as the results
often are, means a search for motives, and an attribution of individual
responsibility for the historical misdeeds of ruling elites. If,
however, any tyranny or venality or aggressive war imposed by the State
was brought about *not* by particular State rulers but by mysterious and
arcane “social forces,” or by the imperfect state of the world—or if, in
some way, *everyone* was guilty (“We are *all* murderers,” proclaims a
common slogan), then there is no point in anyone’s becoming indignant or
rising up against such misdeeds. Furthermore, a discrediting of
“conspiracy theories”—or indeed, of anything smacking of “economic
determinism”—will make the subjects more likely to believe the “general
welfare” reasons that are invariably put forth by the modern State for
engaging in any aggressive actions.

The rule of the State is thus made to seem inevitable. Furthermore, any
alternative to the existing State is encased in an aura of fear.
Neglecting its own monopoly of theft and predation, the State raises the
spectre among its subjects of the chaos that would supposedly ensue if
the State should disappear. The people on their own, it is maintained,
could not possibly supply their own protection against sporadic
criminals and marauders. Furthermore, each State has been particularly
successful over the centuries in instilling fear among its subjects of
*other* State rulers. With the land area of the globe now parcelled out
among particular States, one of the basic doctrines and tactics of the
rulers of each State has been to identify *itself* with the territory it
governs. Since most men tend to love their homeland, the identification
of that land and its population with the State is a means of making
natural patriotism work to the State’s advantage. If, then, “Ruritania”
is attacked by “Walldavia,” the first task of the Ruritanian State and
its intellectuals is to convince the people of Ruritania that the attack
is really upon *them*, and not simply upon their ruling class. In this
way, a war between *rulers* is converted into a war between *peoples,*
with each people rushing to the defense of their rulers in the mistaken
belief that the rulers are busily defending *them.* This device of
nationalism has been particularly successful in recent centuries; it was
not very long ago, at least in Western Europe, when the mass of subjects
regarded wars as irrelevant battles between various sets of nobles and
their retinues.

Another tried and true method for bending subjects to one’s will is the
infusion of guilt. Any increase in private well-being can be attacked as
“unconscionable greed,” “materialism,” or “excessive affluence”; and
mutually beneficial exchanges in the market can be denounced as
“selfish.” Somehow the conclusion always drawn is that more resources
should be expropriated from the private sector and siphoned into the
parasitic “public,” or State, sector. Often the call upon the public to
yield more resources is couched in a stern call by the ruling elite for
more “sacrifices” for the national or the common weal. Somehow, however,
while the public is supposed to sacrifice and curtail its “materialistic
greed,” the sacrifices are always one way. The *State* does not
sacrifice; the State eagerly grabs more and more of the public’s
material resources. Indeed, it is a useful rule of thumb: when your
ruler calls aloud for “sacrifices,” look to your own life and
pocket-book!

This sort of argumentation reflects a general double standard of
morality that is always applied to State rulers but not to anyone else.
No one, for example, is surprised or horrified to learn that businessmen
are seeking higher profits. No one is horrified if workers leave
lower-paying for higher-paying jobs. All this is considered proper and
normal behavior. But if anyone should dare assert that politicians and
bureaucrats are motivated by the desire to maximize *their* incomes, the
hue and cry of “conspiracy theorist” or “economic determinist” spreads
throughout the land. The general opinion—carefully cultivated, of
course, by the State itself—is that men enter politics or government
purely out of devoted concern for the common good and the public weal.
What gives the gentlemen of the State apparatus their superior moral
patina? Perhaps it is the dim and instinctive knowledge of the populace
that the State *is* engaged in systematic theft and predation, and they
may feel that only a dedication to altruism on the part of the State
makes these actions tolerable. To consider politicians and bureaucrats
subject to the same monetary aims as everyone else would strip the Robin
Hood veil from State predation. For it would then be clear that, in the
Oppenheimer phrasing, ordinary citizens were pursuing the peaceful,
productive “economic means” to wealth, while the State apparatus was
devoting itself to the coercive and exploitative organized “political
means.” The emperor’s clothes of supposed altruistic concern for the
common weal would then be stripped from him.

The intellectual arguments used by the State throughout history to
“engineer consent” by the public can be classified into two parts: (1)
that rule by the existing government is inevitable, absolutely
necessary, and far better than the indescribable evils that would ensue
upon its downfall; and (2) that the State rulers are especially great,
wise, and altruistic men—far greater, wiser, and better than their
simple subjects. In former times, the latter argument took the form of
rule by “divine right” or by the “divine ruler” himself, or by an
“aristocracy” of men. In modern times, as we indicated earlier, this
argument stresses not so much divine approval as rule by a wise guild of
“scientific experts” especially endowed in knowledge of statesmanship
and the arcane facts of the world. The increasing use of scientific
jargon, especially in the social sciences, has permitted intellectuals
to weave apologia for State rule which rival the ancient priestcraft in
obscurantism. For example, a thief who presumed to justify his theft by
saying that he was really helping his victims by his spending, thus
giving retail trade a needed boost, would be hooted down without delay.
But when this same theory is clothed in Keynesian mathematical equations
and impressive references to the “multiplier effect,” it carries far
more conviction with a bamboozled public.

In recent years, we have seen the development in the United States of a
profession of “national security managers,” of bureaucrats who never
face electoral procedures, but who continue, through administration
after administration, secretly using their supposed special expertise to
plan wars, interventions, and military adventures. Only their egregious
blunders in the Vietnam war have called their activities into any sort
of public question; before that, they were able to ride high, wide, and
handsome over the public they saw mostly as cannon fodder for their own
purposes.

A public debate between “isolationist” Senator Robert A. Taft and one of
the leading national security intellectuals, McGeorge Bundy, was
instructive in demarking both the issues at stake and the attitude of
the intellectual ruling elite. Bundy attacked Taft in early 1951 for
opening a public debate on the waging of the Korean war. Bundy insisted
that only the executive policy leaders were equipped to manipulate
diplomatic and military force in a lengthy decades-long period of
limited war against the communist nations. It was important, Bundy
maintained, that public opinion and public debate be excluded from
promulgating any policy role in this area. For, he warned, the public
was unfortunately not committed to the rigid national purposes discerned
by the policy managers; it merely responded to the *ad hoc* realities of
given situations. Bundy also maintained that there should be no
recriminations or even examinations of the decisions of the policy
managers, because it was important that the public accept their
decisions without question. Taft, in contrast, denounced the secret
decision-making by military advisers and specialists in the executive
branch, decisions effectively sealed off from public scrutiny.
Furthermore, he complained, “If anyone dared to suggest criticism or
even a thorough debate, he was at once branded as an isolationist and a
saboteur of unity and the bipartisan foreign
policy.”^[12](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn12)^

Similarly, at a time when President Eisenhower and Secretary of State
Dulles were privately contemplating going to war in Indochina, another
prominent national security manager, George F. Kennan, was advising the
public that “There are times when, having elected a government, we will
be best advised to let it govern and let it speak for us as it will in
the councils of the nations.”^[13](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn13)^

We see clearly why the State needs the intellectuals; but why do the
intellectuals need the State? Put simply, the intellectual’s livelihood
in the free market is generally none too secure; for the intellectual,
like everyone else on the market, must depend on the values and choices
of the masses of his fellow men, and it is characteristic of these
masses that they are generally uninterested in intellectual concerns.
The State, on the other hand, is willing to offer the intellectuals a
warm, secure, and permanent berth in its apparatus, a secure income, and
the panoply of prestige.

The eager alliance between the State and the intellectuals was
symbolized by the avid desire of the professors at the University of
Berlin, in the nineteenth century, to form themselves into what they
themselves proclaimed as the “intellectual bodyguard of the House of
Hohenzollern.” From a superficially different ideological perspective,
it can be seen in the revealingly outraged reaction of the eminent
Marxist scholar of ancient China, Joseph Needham, to Karl Wittfogel’s
acidulous critique of ancient Chinese despotism. Wittfogel had shown the
importance for bolstering the system of the Confucian glorification of
the gentleman-scholar officials who manned the ruling bureaucracy of
despotic China. Needham charged indignantly that the “civilization which
Professor Wittfogel is so bitterly attacking was one which could make
poets and scholars into officials.”^[14](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn14)^
What matter the totalitarianism so long as the ruling class is
abundantly staffed by certified intellectuals!

The worshipful and fawning attitude of intellectuals toward their rulers
has been illustrated many times throughout history. A contemporary
American counterpart to the “intellectual bodyguard of the House of
Hohenzollern” is the attitude of so many liberal intellectuals toward
the office and person of the President. Thus, to political scientist
Professor Richard Neustadt, the President is the “sole crown-like symbol
of the Union.” And policy manager Townsend Hoopes, in the winter of
1960, wrote that “under our system the people can look only to the
President to define the nature of our foreign policy problem and the
national programs and sacrifices required to meet it with
effectiveness.”^[15](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn15)^ After generations of
such rhetoric, it is no wonder that Richard Nixon, on the eve of his
election as President, should thus describe his role: “He \[the
President\] must articulate the nation’s values, define its goals and
marshall its will.” Nixon’s conception of his role is hauntingly similar
to Ernst Huber’s articulation, in the Germany of the 1930s, of the
*Constitutional Law of the Greater German Reich*. Huber wrote that the
head of State “sets up the great ends which are to be attained and draws
up the plans for the utilization of all national powers in the
achievement of the common goals... he gives the national life its true
purpose and value.”^[16](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn16)^

The attitude and motivation of the contemporary national security
intellectual bodyguard of the State has been caustically described by
Marcus Raskin, who was a staff member of the National Security Council
during the Kennedy administration. Calling them “megadeath
intellectuals,” Raskin writes that:

> their most important function is to justify and extend the existence
> of their employers. ... In order to justify the continued large-scale
> production of these \[thermonuclear\] bombs and missiles, military and
> industrial leaders needed some kind of theory to rationalize their
> use. ... This became particularly urgent during the late 1950’s, when
> economy-minded members of the Eisenhower Administration began to
> wonder why so much money, thought, and resources were being spent on
> weapons if their use could not be justified. And so began a series of
> rationalizations by the “defense intellectuals” in and out of the
> universities. ... Military procurement will continue to flourish, and
> they will continue to demonstrate why it must. In this respect they
> are no different from the great majority of modern specialists who
> accept the assumptions of the organizations which employ them because
> of the rewards in money and power and prestige. ... They know enough
> not to question their employers’ right to
> exist.^[17](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn17)^

This is not to say that all intellectuals everywhere have been “court
intellectuals,” servitors and junior partners of power. But this has
been the ruling condition in the history of civilizations—generally in
the form of a priestcraft—just as the ruling condition in those
civilizations has been one or another form of despotism. There have been
glorious exceptions, however, particularly in the history of Western
civilization, where intellectuals have often been trenchant critics and
opponents of State power, and have used their intellectual gifts to
fashion theoretical systems which could be used in the struggle for
liberation from that power. But invariably, these intellectuals have
only been able to arise as a significant force when they have been able
to operate from an independent power base—an independent property
base—separate from the apparatus of the State. For wherever the State
controls all property, wealth, and employment, everyone is economically
dependent on it, and it becomes difficult, if not impossible, for such
independent criticism to arise. It has been in the West, with its
decentralized foci of power, its independent sources of property and
employment, and therefore of bases from which to criticize the State,
where a body of intellectual critics has been able to flourish. In the
Middle Ages, the Roman Catholic Church, which was at least separate if
not independent from the State, and the new free towns were able to
serve as centers of intellectual and also of substantive opposition. In
later centuries, teachers, ministers, and pamphleteers in a relatively
free society were able to use their independence from the State to
agitate for further expansion of freedom. In contrast, one of the first
libertarian philosophers, Lao-tse, living in the midst of ancient
Chinese despotism, saw no hope for achieving liberty in that
totalitarian society except by counseling quietism, to the point of the
individual’s dropping out of social life altogether.

With decentralized power, with a Church separate from the State, with
flourishing towns and cities able to develop outside the feudal power
structure, and with freedom in society, the economy was able to develop
in Western Europe in a way that transcended all previous civilizations.
Furthermore, the Germanic—and particularly the Celtic—tribal structure
which succeeded the disintegrating Roman Empire had strong libertarian
elements. Instead of a mighty State apparatus exerting a monopoly of
violence, disputes were solved by contending tribesmen consulting the
elders of the tribe on the nature and application of the tribe’s
customary and common law. The “chief” was generally merely a war leader
who was only called into his warrior role whenever war with other tribes
was under way. There was no permanent war or military bureaucracy in the
tribes. In Western Europe, as in many other civilizations, the typical
model of the origin of the State was not via a voluntary “social
contract” but by the conquest of one tribe by another. The original
liberty of the tribe or the peasantry thus falls victim to the
conquerors. At first, the conquering tribe killed and looted the victims
and rode on. But at some time the conquerors decided that it would be
more profitable to settle down among the conquered peasantry and rule
and loot them on a permanent and systematic basis. The periodic tribute
exacted from the conquered subjects eventually came to be called
“taxation.” And, with equal generality, the conquering chieftains
parcelled out the land of the peasantry to the various warlords, who
were then able to settle down and collect feudal “rent” from the
peasantry. The peasants were often enslaved, or rather enserfed, to the
land itself to provide a continuing source of exploited labor for the
feudal lords.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn18)^

We may note a few prominent instances of the birth of a modern State
through conquest. One was the military conquest of the Indian peasantry
in Latin America by the Spaniards. The conquering Spanish not only
established a new State over the Indians, but the land of the peasantry
was parcelled out among the conquering warlords, who were ever after to
collect rent from the tillers of the land. Another instance was the new
political form imposed upon the Saxons of England after their conquest
by the Normans in 1066. The land of England was parcelled out among the
Norman warrior lords, who thereby formed a State and feudal-land
apparatus of rule over the subject population. For the libertarian, the
most interesting and certainly the most poignant example of the creation
of a State through conquest was the destruction of the libertarian
society of ancient Ireland by England in the seventeenth century, a
conquest which established an imperial State and ejected numerous Irish
from their cherished land. The libertarian society of Ireland, which
lasted for a thousand years—and which will be described further
below—was able to resist English conquest for hundreds of years because
of the absence of a State which could be conquered easily and then used
by the conquerors to rule over the native population.

But while throughout Western history, intellectuals have formulated
theories designed to check and *limit* State power, each State has been
able to use its own intellectuals to turn those ideas around into
further legitimations of its own advance of power. Thus, originally, in
Western Europe the concept of the “divine right of kings” was a doctrine
promoted by the Church to limit State power. The idea was that the king
could not just impose his arbitrary will. His edicts were limited to
conforming with the divine law. As absolute monarchy advanced, however,
the kings were able to turn the concept around to the idea that God put
his stamp of approval on any of the king’s actions; that he ruled by
“divine right.”

Similarly, the concept of parliamentary democracy began as a popular
check on the absolute rule of the monarch. The king was limited by the
power of parliament to grant him tax revenues. Gradually, however, as
parliament displaced the king as head of State, the parliament itself
became the unchecked State sovereign. In the early nineteenth century,
English utilitarians, who advocated additional individual liberty in the
name of social utility and the general welfare, were to see these
concepts turned into sanctions for expanding the power of the State.

As De Jouvenel writes:

> Many writers on theories of sovereignty have worked out one or the
> other of these restrictive devices. But in the end every single such
> theory has, sooner or later, lost its original purpose, and come to
> act merely as a springboard to Power, by providing it with the
> powerful aid of an invisible sovereign with whom it could in time
> successfully identify itself.^[19](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn19)^

Certainly, the most ambitious attempt in history to impose limits on the
State was the Bill of Rights and other restrictive parts of the United
States Constitution. Here, written limits on government became the
fundamental law, to be interpreted by a judiciary supposedly independent
of the other branches of government. All Americans are familiar with the
process by which John C. Calhoun’s prophetic analysis has been
vindicated; the State’s own monopoly judiciary has inexorably broadened
the construction of State power over the last century and a half. But
few have been as keen as liberal Professor Charles Black—who hails the
process—in seeing that the State has been able to transform judicial
review itself from a limiting device into a powerful instrument for
gaining legitimacy for its actions in the minds of the public. If a
judicial decree of “unconstitutional” is a mighty check on governmental
power, so too a verdict of “constitutional” is an equally mighty weapon
for fostering public acceptance of ever greater governmental power.

Professor Black begins his analysis by pointing out the crucial
necessity for “legitimacy” of any government in order to endure; that
is, basic majority acceptance of the government and its actions.
Acceptance of legitimacy, however, becomes a real problem in a country
like the United States, where “substantive limitations are built into
the theory on which the government rests.” What is needed, adds Black,
is a method by which the government can assure the public that its
expanding powers are indeed “constitutional.” And this, he concludes,
has been the major historic function of judicial review. Let Black
illustrate the problem:

> The supreme risk \[to the government\] is that of disaffection and a
> feeling of outrage widely disseminated throughout the population, and
> loss of moral authority by the government as such, however long it may
> be propped up by force or inertia or the lack of an appealing and
> immediately available alternative. Almost everybody living under a
> government of limited powers, must sooner or later be subjected to
> some governmental action which as a matter of private opinion he
> regards as outside the power of government or positively forbidden to
> government. A man is drafted, though he finds nothing in the
> Constitution about being drafted. ... A farmer is told how much wheat
> he can raise; he believes, and he discovers that some respectable
> lawyers believe with him, that the government has no more right to
> tell him how much wheat he can grow than it has to tell his daughter
> whom she can marry. A man goes to the federal penitentiary for saying
> what he wants to, and he paces his cell reciting. ... “Congress shall
> make no laws abridging the freedom of speech.”... A businessman is
> told what he can ask, and must ask, for buttermilk.
>
> The danger is real enough that each of these people (and who is not of
> their number?) will confront the concept of governmental limitation
> with the reality (as he sees it) of the flagrant overstepping of
> actual limits, and draw the obvious conclusion as to the status of his
> government with respect to
> legitimacy.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn20)^

This danger is averted, Black adds, by the State’s propounding the
doctrine that *some one* agency must have the ultimate decision on
constitutionality, and that this agency must be part of the federal
government itself. For while the seeming independence of the federal
judiciary has played a vital role in making its actions virtual Holy
Writ for the bulk of the population, it is also true that the judiciary
is part and parcel of the government apparatus and is appointed by the
executive and legislative branches. Professor Black concedes that the
government has thereby set itself up as a judge in its own case, and has
thus violated a basic juridical principle for arriving at any kind of
just decision. But Black is remarkably lighthearted about this
fundamental breach: “The final power of the State... must stop where the
law stops it. And who shall set the limit, and who shall enforce the
stopping, against the mightiest power? Why, the State itself, of course,
through its judges and its laws. Who controls the temperate? Who teaches
the wise?”^[21](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn21)^ And so Black admits that
when we have a State, we hand over all our weapons and means of coercion
to the State apparatus, we turn over all of our powers of ultimate
decision-making to this deified group, and *then* we must jolly well sit
back quietly and await the unending stream of justice that will pour
forth from these institutions—even though they are basically judging
their own case. Black sees no conceivable alternative to this coercive
monopoly of judicial decisions enforced by the State, but here is
precisely where our new movement challenges this conventional view and
asserts that there *is* a viable alternative: libertarianism.

Seeing no such alternative, Professor Black falls back on mysticism in
his defense of the State, for in the final analysis he finds the
achievement of justice and legitimacy from the State’s perpetual judging
of its own cause to be “something of a miracle.” In this way, the
liberal Black joins the conservative Burnham in falling back on the
miraculous and thereby admitting that there is no satisfactory rational
argument in support of the State.^[22](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn22)^

Applying his realistic view of the Supreme Court to the famous conflict
between the Court and the New Deal in the 1930s, Professor Black chides
his liberal colleagues for their shortsightedness in denouncing judicial
obstructionism:

> the standard version of the story of the New Deal and the Court,
> though accurate in its way, displaces the emphasis. ... It
> concentrates on the difficulties; it almost forgets how the whole
> thing turned out. The upshot of the matter was (and this is what I
> like to emphasize) that after some twenty-four months of balking...
> the Supreme Court, without a single change in the law of its
> composition, or, indeed, in its actual manning, *placed the
> affirmative stamp of legitimacy on the New Deal, and on the whole new
> conception of government in America.* \[Italics the
> author’s\]^[23](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn23)^

In this way, the Supreme Court was able to put the quietus to the large
body of Americans who had strong constitutional objections to the
expanded powers of the New Deal:

> Of course, not everyone was satisfied. The Bonnie Prince Charlie of
> constitutionally commanded laissez-faire still stirs the hearts of a
> few zealots in the Highlands of choleric unreality. But there is no
> longer any significant or dangerous public doubt as to the
> constitutional power of Congress to deal as it does with the national
> economy. ... We had no means, other than the Supreme Court, for
> imparting legitimacy to the New
> Deal.^[24](#24-notes.html#chap03_fn24)^

Thus, even in the United States, unique among governments in having a
constitution, parts of which at least were meant to impose strict and
solemn limits upon its actions, even here the Constitution has proved to
be an instrument for ratifying the expansion of State power rather than
the opposite. As Calhoun saw, any written limits that leave it to
government to interpret its own powers are bound to be interpreted as
sanctions for expanding and not binding those powers. In a profound
sense, the idea of binding down power with the chains of a written
constitution has proved to be a noble experiment that failed. The idea
of a strictly limited government has proved to be utopian; some other,
more radical means must be found to prevent the growth of the aggressive
State. The libertarian system would meet this problem by scrapping the
entire notion of creating a government—an institution with a coercive
monopoly of force over a given territory—and *then* hoping to find ways
to keep that government from expanding. The libertarian alternative is
to abstain from such a monopoly government to begin with.

We will explore the entire notion of a State-less society, a society
without formal government, in later chapters. But one instructive
exercise is to try to abandon the habitual ways of seeing things, and to
consider the argument for the State *de novo.* Let us try to transcend
the fact that for as long as we can remember, the State has monopolized
police and judicial services in society. Suppose that we were all
starting completely from scratch, and that millions of us had been
dropped down upon the earth, fully grown and developed, from some other
planet. Debate begins as to how protection (police and judicial
services) will be provided. Someone says: “Let’s all give all of our
weapons to Joe Jones over there, and to his relatives. And let Jones and
his family decide all disputes among us. In that way, the Joneses will
be able to protect all of us from any aggression or fraud that anyone
else may commit. With all the power and all the ability to make ultimate
decisions on disputes in the hands of Jones, we will all be protected
from one another. And then let us allow the Joneses to obtain their
income from this great service by using their weapons, and by exacting
as much revenue by coercion as they shall desire.” Surely in that sort
of situation, no one would treat this proposal with anything but
ridicule. For it would be starkly evident that there would be no way, in
that case, for any of us to protect ourselves from the aggressions, or
the depredations, of the Joneses themselves. No one would then have the
total folly to respond to that long-standing and most perceptive query:
“Who shall guard the guardians?” by answering with Professor Black’s
blithe: “Who controls the temperate?” It is only because we have become
accustomed over thousands of years to the existence of the State that we
now give precisely this kind of absurd answer to the problem of social
protection and defense.

And, of course, the State never really did begin with this sort of
“social contract.” As Oppenheimer pointed out, the State generally began
in violence and conquest; even if at times internal processes gave rise
to the State, it was certainly never by general consensus or contract.

The libertarian creed can now be summed up as (1) the absolute right of
every man to the ownership of his own body; (2) the equally absolute
right to own and therefore to control the material resources he has
found and transformed; and (3) therefore, the absolute right to exchange
or give away the ownership to such titles to whoever is willing to
exchange or receive them. As we have seen, each of these steps involves
*property* rights, but even if we call step (1) “personal” rights, we
shall see that problems about “personal liberty” inextricably involve
the rights of material property or free exchange. Or, briefly, the
rights of personal liberty and “freedom of enterprise” almost invariably
intertwine and cannot really be separated.

We have seen that the exercise of personal “freedom of speech,” for
example, almost invariably involves the exercise of “economic
freedom”—i.e., freedom to own and exchange material property. The
holding of a meeting to exercise freedom of speech involves the hiring
of a hall, traveling to the hall over roads, and using some form of
transportation, etc. The closely related “freedom of the press” even
more evidently involves the cost of printing and of using a press, the
sale of leaflets to willing buyers—in short, all the ingredients of
“economic freedom.” Furthermore, our example of “shouting ‘fire’ in a
crowded theater” provides us with the clear guideline for deciding
*whose* rights must be defended in any given situation—the guidelines
being provided by our criterion: the rights of property.

# PART II [10-part02.html#page87]

# LIBERTARIAN APPLICATIONS TO CURRENT PROBLEMS [libertarian-applications-to-current-problems]

# 4 THE PROBLEMS [11-chap04.html#page89]

Let us take a brief look at the major problem areas of our society and
see if we can detect any “red thread” that runs through all of them.

*High taxes*. High and rising taxes have crippled almost everyone and
are hampering productivity, incentives, and thrift, as well as the free
energies of the people. On the federal level, there is a rising
rebellion against the burden of income taxes, and there is a flourishing
tax rebel movement, with its own organizations and magazines, which
refuses to pay a tax which it regards as predatory and unconstitutional.
On the state and local levels, there is a rising tide of sentiment
against oppressive property taxes. Thus, a record 1.2 million California
voters signed the petition for the Jarvis-Gann initiative on the 1978
ballot, a proposal which would drastically and permanently lower
property taxes by two-thirds to one percent and place ceilings upon the
assessed value of the property. Furthermore, the Jarvis-Gann initiative
enforces the freeze by requiring the approval of two-thirds of all
registered voters in the state of California to raise property taxes
beyond the one-percent ceiling. And, to make sure that the state doesn’t
simply substitute some other tax, the initiative also requires a
two-thirds vote by the state legislature to increase any other tax in
the state.

Furthermore, in the fall of 1977, scores of thousands of homeowners in
Cook County, Illinois, engaged in a tax strike against the property tax,
which had increased dramatically due to higher assessments.

It need hardly be emphasized that taxation, of income, property, or
whatever, is the exclusive monopoly of government. No other individual
or organization enjoys the privilege of taxation, of acquiring its
income by coercion.

*Urban fiscal crisis*. Throughout the nation, states and localities are
having difficulty paying interest and principal due on their swollen
public debt. New York City has already pioneered in a partial default on
its contractual obligations: The urban fiscal crisis is simply a matter
of urban governments spending too much, more even than the high taxes
they extract from us. Again, how much urban or state governments spend
is up to them; once again, government is to blame.

*Vietnam and other foreign interventions.* The war in Vietnam was a
total disaster for American foreign policy; after countless people were
murdered and the land devastated, and at an enormous cost in resources,
the American-supported government finally collapsed in early 1975. The
disaster of the Vietnam war has properly called the rest of America’s
interventionist foreign policy into severe question, and was partly
responsible for Congress’s putting a brake on U.S. military intervention
in the Angolan fiasco. Foreign policy, of course, is also an exclusive
monopoly of the federal government. The war was waged by our armed
forces which, again, are a compulsory monopoly of the same federal
government. So the government is wholly responsible for the entire war
and foreign policy problem, as a whole and in all of its aspects.

*Crime in the streets.* Consider: the crime in question is being
committed, by definition, on the streets. The streets are owned, almost
universally, by government, which thereby has a virtual monopoly of
street-ownership. The police, who are supposed to guard us against this
crime, are a compulsory monopoly of the government. And the courts,
which are in the business of convicting and punishing criminals, are
also a coercive monopoly of the government. So government has been in
charge of every single aspect of the crime-in-the-streets problem. The
failure here, just as the failure in Vietnam, must be chalked up solely
to government.

*Traffic congestion*. Once again, this occurs solely on government-owned
streets and roads.

*The military-industrial complex*. This complex is entirely a creature
of the federal government. It is the government that decides to spend
countless billions on overkill weaponry, it is the government that hands
out contracts, the government that subsidizes inefficiency through
cost-plus guarantees, the government that builds plants and leases or
gives them outright to contractors. Of course, the businesses involved
lobby for these privileges, but it is only through government that the
mechanism for this privilege, and this wasteful misallocation of
resources, can possibly exist.

*Transportation.* The crisis of transportation involves not only
congested streets, but also decaying railroads, overpriced airlines,
airport congestion at peak hours, and subways (e.g., New York City) that
are suffering deficits and visibly heading toward collapse. Yet: the
railroads were overbuilt from extensive government subsidies (federal,
state, and local) during the nineteenth century, and have been the most
heavily regulated industry for the longest period of time in American
history. Airlines are cartelized through regulation by the Civil
Aeronautics Board and subsidized through such regulation, mail
contracts, and virtually free airports. Airports for commercial lines
are all owned by branches of the government, largely local. The New York
City subways have been government-owned for decades.

*River pollution*. The rivers are, in effect, unowned, i.e., they have
been kept as “public domain” owned by government. Furthermore, by far
the biggest culprits in water pollution are the municipally owned sewage
disposal systems. Again: government is at the same time the largest
polluter, as well as the careless “owner” of the resource.

*Water shortages.* Water shortages are chronic in some areas of the
country, and intermittent in others, such as New York City. Yet the
government, (1) via its ownership of the public domain, owns the rivers
from which much of the water comes, and (2) as virtually the only
commercial supplier of water, the government owns the reservoirs and
water conduits.

*Air pollution.* Again, the government, as owner of the public domain,
“owns” the air. Furthermore, it has been the courts, owned solely by the
government, which, as an act of deliberate policy, have for generations
failed to protect our property rights in our bodies and orchards from
the pollution generated by industry. Moreover, much of the direct
pollution comes from government-owned plants.

*Power shortages and blackouts.* Throughout the land, state and local
governments have created compulsory monopolies of gas and electric power
and have granted these monopoly privileges to private utility companies,
which are then regulated and have their rates set by government agencies
to insure a permanent and fixed profit. Again, government has been the
source of the monopoly and the regulation.

*Telephone service.* Increasingly failing telephone service comes,
again, from a utility which receives a compulsory monopoly privilege
from government, and which finds its rates set by government to
guarantee a profit. As in the case of gas and electricity, no one is
allowed to compete with the monopoly phone company.

*Postal service.* Suffering from heavy deficits throughout its
existence, the postal service, in stark contrast to the goods and
services produced by private industry on the free market, has become
steadily higher in price and lower in quality. The mass of the public,
using first-class mail, has been forced to subsidize businesses using
second- and third-class services. Again, the Post Office has been, since
the late nineteenth century, a compulsory monopoly of government.
Whenever private firms have been allowed to compete, even illegally, in
delivery of mail, they have invariably provided better service at a
lower price.

*Television.* Television consists of bland programs and distorted news.
Radio and television channels have been nationalized for half a century
by the federal government, which grants channels as a gift to privileged
licensees, and can and does withdraw these gifts when a station
displeases the government’s Federal Communications Commission. How can
any genuine freedom of speech or of the press exist under such
conditions?

*Welfare system*. Welfare, of course, is exclusively the province of
government, largely state and local.

*Urban housing.* Along with traffic, one of our most conspicuous urban
failures. Yet there are few other industries that have been so closely
intertwined with government. Urban planning has controlled and regulated
the cities. Zoning laws have ringed housing and land use with
innumerable restrictions. Property taxes have crippled urban development
and forced abandonment of houses. Building codes have restricted housing
construction and made it more costly. Urban renewal has provided massive
subsidies to real estate developers, forced the bulldozing of apartments
and rental stores, lowered the supply of housing, and intensified racial
discrimination. Extensive government loans have generated overbuilding
in the suburbs. Rent controls have created apartment shortages and
reduced the supply of residential housing.

*Union strikes and restrictions*. Unions have become a nuisance with
power to cripple the economy, but only as a result of numerous special
privileges afforded by the government; especially various immunities
accorded unions, particularly the Wagner Act of 1935, still in effect,
which compels employers to bargain with unions which gain a majority
vote of a “bargaining unit” arbitrarily defined by the government
itself.

*Education.* Once as revered and sacrosanct in American opinion as
motherhood or the flag, the public school, in recent years, has come
under widespread attack, from all parts of the political spectrum. Even
its supporters would not presume to maintain that the public schools
actually teach much of anything. And we have recently seen extreme cases
in which the actions of the public schools have motivated a violent
reaction in such widely different areas as South Boston and Kanawha
County, West Virginia. The public schools, of course, are totally owned
and operated by state and local government—with considerable assist and
coordination from the federal level. The public schools are backed up by
compulsory attendance laws which force all children through high school
age to attend school—either public or private schools certified by
governmental authorities. Higher education, too, has become closely
intertwined with government in recent decades: many universities are
government-owned, and the others are systematic receivers of grants,
subsidies, and contracts.

*Inflation and stagflation.* The United States, as well as the rest of
the world, has been suffering for many years from chronic and
accelerating inflation, an inflation accompanied by high unemployment
and persisting through severe as well as mild recessions
(“stagflation”). An explanation of these unwelcome phenomena will be
presented below; here let it be said that the root cause is in a
continuing expansion of the money supply, a compulsory monopoly of the
federal government (anyone who presumes to compete with the government’s
issuing of money goes to jail for counterfeiting). A vital part of the
nation’s money supply is issued as “checkbook money” by the banking
system, which in turn is under total control by the federal government
and its Federal Reserve System.

*Watergate.* Finally, and not least, is the entire traumatic syndrome
suffered by Americans known as “Watergate.” What Watergate has meant is
a total desanctifying of the President and of such previously sacrosanct
federal institutions as the CIA and the FBI. The invasions of property,
the police state methods, the deception of the public, the corruption,
the manifold and systemic commissions of crime by a once virtually
all-powerful President led to a once unthinkable impeachment of a
President and of a widespread and well-justified lack of trust in all
politicians and all government officials. The Establishment has often
bemoaned this new, pervasive lack of trust, but has not been able to
restore the naive public faith of pre-Watergate days. The liberal
historian Cecilia Kenyon once chastised the Anti-Federalists—the
defenders of the Articles of Confederation and opponents of the
Constitution—as being “Men of Little Faith” in the institutions of
government. One suspects that she would not be quite so naive if she
were writing that article in the post-Watergate
era.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap04_fn1)^

Watergate, of course, is purely and totally a governmental phenomenon.
The President is the chief executive of the federal government, the
“plumbers” were his instrument, and the FBI and the CIA are governmental
agencies as well. And it is, quite understandably, faith and trust in
government that was shattered by Watergate.

If we look around, then, at the crucial problem areas of our society—the
areas of crisis and failure—we find in each and every case a “red
thread” marking and uniting them all: the thread of government. In every
one of these cases, government either has totally run or heavily
influenced the activity. John Kenneth Galbraith, in his best-selling
*The Affluent Society*, recognized that the government sector was the
focus of our social failure—but drew instead the odd lesson that
therefore still more funds and resources must be diverted from the
private to the public sector. He thereby ignored the fact that the role
of government in America—federal, state, and local—has expanded
enormously, both absolutely and proportionately, in this century and
especially in recent decades. Unfortunately, Galbraith never once raised
the question: Is there something inherent in government operation and
activity, something which creates the very failures which we see
abounding? We shall investigate some of the major problems of government
and of liberty in this country, see where the failures came from, and
propound the solutions of the new libertarianism.

# 5 INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE [12-chap05.html#page97]

If there is anything a libertarian must be squarely and totally against,
it is *involuntary servitude*—forced labor—an act which denies the most
elemental right of self-ownership. “Liberty” and “slavery” have ever
been recognized to be polar opposites. The libertarian, therefore, is
totally opposed to slavery.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn1)^ An academic
question nowadays, one might object? But is it really? For what *is*
slavery but (a) forcing people to work at tasks the slavemaster wishes,
and (b) paying them either pure subsistence or, at any rate, less than
the slave would have accepted voluntarily. In short, forced labor at
below free-market wages.

Thus, are we really free of “slavery,” of involuntary servitude in
present-day America? Is the prohibition against involuntary servitude of
the Thirteenth Amendment really being
obeyed?^[2](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn2)^

## CONSCRIPTION [12-chap05.html#page98]

Surely, for one example, there can be no more blatant case of
involuntary servitude than our entire system of *conscription*. Every
youth is forced to register with the selective service system when he
turns eighteen. He is compelled to carry his draft card at all times,
and, at whatever time the federal government deems fit, he is seized by
the authorities and inducted into the armed forces. There his body and
will are no longer his own; he is subject to the dictates of the
government; and he can be forced to kill and to place his own life in
jeopardy if the authorities so decree. What else is involuntary
servitude if not the draft?

The utilitarian aspect permeates the argument for the conscription
system. Thus the government uses the argument: *Who* will defend us
against foreign attack if we do not employ coercion and conscript our
defenders? There are several rebuttals for a libertarian to make to this
line of reasoning. In the first place, if you and I and our next-door
neighbor think that we need defending, we have no moral right to use
coercion—the bayonet or the revolver—to force someone else to defend us.
This act of conscripting is just as much a deed of unjustifiable
aggression—of kidnapping and possibly murder—as the alleged aggression
we are trying to guard ourselves against in the first place. If we add
that the draftees owe their bodies and their lives, if necessary, to
“society” or to “their country,” then we must retort: *Who is* this
“society” or this “country” that is being used as a talisman to justify
enslavement? It is simply all individuals in the territorial area
*except* the youths being conscripted. “Society” and “country” are in
this case mythical abstractions that are being used to cloak the naked
use of coercion to promote the interests of specific individuals.

Secondly, to move to the utilitarian plane, *why* is it considered
necessary to conscript defenders? No one is conscripted on the free
market, yet on that market people obtain, through voluntary purchase and
sale, every conceivable manner of goods and services, even the most
necessary ones. On the market, people can and do obtain food, shelter,
clothing, medical care, etc. Why can’t they hire defenders as well?
Indeed, there are plenty of people being hired every day to perform
dangerous services: forest firefighters, rangers, test pilots, and...
police and private guards and watchmen. Why can’t soldiers be hired in
the same way?

Or, to put it another way, the government employs countless thousands of
people for all sorts of services, from truck drivers to scientists to
typists; how is it that none of these people have to be conscripted? Why
is there no “shortage” of these occupations to supposedly force the
government to resort to compulsion to obtain them? To go a step further,
even within the army there is no “shortage” of officers and no need to
draft them; no one conscripts generals or admirals. The answer to these
questions is simple: there is no shortage of government typists because
the government goes out on the market and hires them at the market wage;
there is no shortage of generals because they are paid handsomely, in
salaries, perquisites, and pensions. There *is* a shortage of buck
privates because their pay is—or was, until very recently—abysmally
below the market wage. For years, even including the monetary value of
the free food, shelter, and other services supplied the GIs, the
earnings of the buck private were something like one-half the salary he
could have earned in civilian life. Is it any wonder that there has been
a chronic shortage of enlistees? For years it has been known that the
way to induce people to volunteer for hazardous jobs is to pay them
extra as a compensation. But the government has been paying the men half
of what they could earn in private life.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn3)^

There is also the special disgrace of the doctors’ draft, in which
physicians are subject to the draft at ages far beyond anyone else. Are
doctors, then, to be penalized for their entry into the profession of
medicine? What is the moral justification for onerous burdens placed on
this particular, and vitally important, profession? Is this the way to
cure the shortage of doctors—to put every man on notice that if he
becomes a physician he will be sure to be drafted, and at a specially
late age? Once again, the armed forces’ need for doctors could easily be
satisfied if the government were willing to pay physicians the market
salary, plus enough to compensate them for the hazardous labor. If the
government wishes to hire nuclear physicists or “think-tank”
strategists, it finds ways of doing so at extremely handsome salaries.
Are doctors lower forms of humanity?

## THE ARMY [the-army]

While conscription into the armed forces is a blatant and aggravated
form of involuntary servitude, there is another, far more subtle and
therefore less detectable form: the structure of the army itself.
Consider this: in what other occupation in the country are there severe
penalties, including prison and in some cases execution, for
“desertion,” i.e., for quitting the particular employment? If someone
quits General Motors, is he shot at sunrise?

It might be objected that, in the case of enlistees, the soldier or
officer has voluntarily agreed to serve for a certain term, and he is
therefore obligated to continue in service for that term of years. But
the whole concept of “term of service” is part of the problem. Suppose,
for example, that an engineer signs a contract with ARAMCO to serve for
three years in Saudi Arabia. After a few months he decides that the life
is not for him and he quits. This may well be a *moral* default on his
part—a breach of moral obligation. But is it a legally enforceable
obligation? In short, can he or should he be forced by the monopoly of
weaponry of government to keep working for the remainder of his term? If
so, that would be forced labor and enslavement. For while it is true
that he made a promise of future work, his body continues, in a free
society, to be owned by himself alone. In practice and in libertarian
theory as well, then, the engineer might be morally criticized for the
breach, he may be blacklisted by other oil firms, he may be forced to
return any advance pay tendered to him by the company, but he will *not*
be enslaved to ARAMCO for the three-year period.

But if this is true of ARAMCO, or of any other occupation or job in
private life, why should it be different in the army? If a man signs up
for seven years and then quits, he should be allowed to leave. He will
lose pension rights, he will be morally criticized, he may be
blacklisted from similar occupations, but he cannot, as a self-owner, be
enslaved against his will.

It may be protested that the armed forces is a peculiarly important
occupation that needs this sort of coercive sanction that other jobs do
not have. Setting aside the importance of such occupations as medicine,
agriculture and transportation that need not resort to such methods, let
us consider a comparable defense occupation in civilian life—the police.
Surely the police perform an equally, and perhaps more vital,
service—and yet every year people join the police and quit the force,
and there is no coercive attempt to bind their labor through years of
enlistment. In addition to demanding the end of conscription, then, the
libertarian also proposes to do away with the entire concept of a *term*
of enlistment and the practice of slavery this implies. Let the armed
forces operate in ways similar to police, firemen, rangers, private
guards, etc.—free of the blight and the moral crime of involuntary
servitude.

But there is more to be said about the army as an institution, even if
it were made completely voluntary. Americans have almost totally
forgotten one of the noblest and strongest elements in the original
American heritage: determined opposition to the entire institution of a
“standing army.” A government that has a permanent standing army at its
disposal will always be tempted to use it, and to use it in an
aggressive, interventionist, and warlike manner. While foreign policy
will be dealt with below, it is clear that a permanent army is a
standing temptation to the State to enlarge its power, to push around
other people as well as other countries, and to dominate the internal
life of the nation. The original aim of the Jeffersonian movement—a
largely libertarian factor in American political life—was to abolish the
standing army and navy altogether. The original American principle was
that if the nation was attacked, then the citizens would hasten to join
to repell the invader. A standing armed force, then, could only lead to
trouble and to the aggrandizement of State power. In the course of his
trenchant and prophetic attack on the proposed Constitution in the
Virginia ratifying convention, Patrick Henry warned of a standing army:
“Congress, by the power of taxation, by that of raising an army, and by
their control over the militia, have the sword in one hand, and the
purse in the other. Shall we be safe without
either?”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn4)^

Any standing army, then, poses a standing threat to liberty. Its
monopoly of coercive weapons, its modern tendency toward creating and
supporting a “military-industrial complex” to supply that army, and
last, but not least, as Patrick Henry notes, the taxing power to finance
that army, pose a continuing threat of the army’s perpetual expansion in
size and power. *Any* tax-supported institution, of course, is opposed
by the libertarian as coercive, but an army is uniquely menacing for its
amassing and collecting into one set of hands the massive power of
modern weaponry.

## ANTI-STRIKE LAWS [anti-strike-laws]

On October 4, 1971, President Nixon invoked the Taft-Hartley Act to
obtain a court injunction forcing the suspension of a dock strike for 80
days; this was the ninth time the federal government had used the Act in
a dock strike. Months earlier, the head of the New York City teachers’
union went to jail for several days for defying a law prohibiting public
employees from striking. It is no doubt convenient for a long-suffering
public to be spared the disruptions of a strike. Yet the “solution”
imposed was forced labor, pure and simple; the workers were coerced,
against their will, into going back to work. There is no moral excuse,
in a society claiming to be opposed to slavery and in a country which
has outlawed involuntary servitude, for any legal or judicial action
prohibiting strikes—or jailing union leaders who fail to comply. Slavery
is all too often more convenient for the slavemasters.

It is true that the strike is a peculiar form of work stoppage. The
strikers do not merely quit their jobs; they also assert that somehow,
in some metaphysical sense, they still “own” their jobs and are entitled
to them, and intend to return to them when the issues are resolved. But
the remedy for this self-contradictory policy, as well as for the
disruptive power of labor unions, is not to pass laws outlawing strikes;
the remedy is to remove the substantial body of law, federal, state, and
local, that confers special governmental privileges on labor unions. All
that is needed, both for libertarian principle and for a healthy
economy, is to remove and abolish these special privileges.

These privileges have been enshrined in federal law—especially in the
Wagner-Taft-Hartley Act, passed originally in 1935, and the
Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1931. The latter prohibits the courts from
issuing injunctions in cases of imminent union violence; the former
compels employers to bargain “in good faith” with any union that wins
the votes of the majority of a work unit arbitrarily defined by the
federal government—and also prohibits employers from discriminating
against union organizers. It was only after the Wagner Act—and its
predecessor, the NIRA in 1933—that labor unions were able to become a
powerful force in American life. It was then that unions skyrocketed
from something like five percent to over twenty percent of the labor
force. Furthermore, local and state laws often protect unions from being
sued, and they place restrictions on the employers’ hiring of
strikebreaking labor; and police are often instructed not to interfere
in the use of violence against strikebreakers by union pickets. Take
away these special privileges and immunities, and labor unions would
sink back to their previous negligible role in the American economy.

It is characteristic of our statist trend that, when general indignation
against unions led to the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947, the government did
not repeal any of these special privileges. Instead, it added special
restrictions upon unions to limit the power which the government itself
had created. Given a choice, the natural tendency of the State is to add
to its power, not to cut it down; and so we have the peculiar situation
of the government first building up unions and then howling for
restrictions against their power. This is reminiscent of the American
farm programs, in which one branch of the Department of Agriculture pays
farmers to *restrict* their production, while another branch of the same
agency pays them to increase their productivity. Irrational, surely,
from the point of view of the consumers and the taxpayers, but perfectly
rational from the point of view of the subsidized farmers *and* of the
growing power of the bureaucracy. Similarly, the government’s seemingly
contradictory policy on unions serves, first, to aggrandize the power of
government over labor relations, and second, to foster a suitably
integrated and Establishment-minded unionism as junior partner in
government’s role over the economy.

## THE TAX SYSTEM [the-tax-system]

In a sense, the entire system of taxation is a form of involuntary
servitude. Take, in particular, the *income tax.* The high levels of
income tax mean that all of us work a large part of the year—several
months—for *nothing* for Uncle Sam before being allowed to enjoy our
incomes on the market. Part of the essence of slavery, after all, is
forced work for someone at little or no pay. But the income tax means
that we sweat and earn income, only to see the government extract a
large chunk of it by coercion for its own purposes. What is this but
forced labor at no pay?

The *withholding* feature of the income tax is a still more clear-cut
instance of involuntary servitude. For as the intrepid Connecticut
industrialist Vivien Kellems argued years ago, the employer is forced to
expend time, labor, and money in the business of deducting and
transmitting his employees’ taxes to the federal and state
governments—yet the employer is not recompensed for this expenditure.
What moral principle justifies the government’s forcing employers to act
as its unpaid tax collectors?

The withholding principle, of course, is the linchpin of the whole
federal income tax system. Without the steady and relatively painless
process of deducting the tax from the worker’s paycheck, the government
could never hope to raise the high levels of tax from the workers in one
lump sum. Few people remember that the withholding system was only
instituted during World War II and was supposed to be a wartime
expedient. Like so many other features of State despotism, however, the
wartime emergency measure soon became a hallowed part of the American
system.

It is perhaps significant that the federal government, challenged by
Vivien Kellems to test the constitutionality of the withholding system,
failed to take up the challenge. In February 1948 Miss Kellems, a small
manufacturer in Westport, Connecticut, announced that she was defying
the withholding law and was refusing to deduct the tax from her
employees. She demanded that the federal government indict her, so that
the courts would be able to rule on the constitutionality of the
withholding system. The government refused to do so, but instead seized
the amount due from her bank account. Miss Kellems then sued in federal
court for the government to return her funds. When the suit finally came
to trial in February 1951, the jury ordered the government to refund her
money. But the test of constitutionality never
came.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn5)^

To add insult to injury, the individual taxpayer, in filling out his tax
form, is also forced by the government to work at no pay on the
laborious and thankless task of reckoning how much he owes the
government. Here again, he cannot charge the government for the cost and
labor expended in making out his return. Furthermore, the law requiring
everyone to fill out his tax form is a clear violation of the Fifth
Amendment of the Constitution, prohibiting the government from forcing
anyone to incriminate himself. Yet the courts, often zealous in
protecting Fifth Amendment rights in less sensitive areas, have done
nothing here, in a case where the entire existence of the swollen
federal government structure is at stake. The repeal of either the
income tax or the withholding or self-incriminating provisions would
force the government back to the relatively minor levels of power that
the country enjoyed before the twentieth century.

*Retail* sales, excise, and admission taxes also compel unpaid labor—in
these cases, the unpaid labor of the retailer in collecting and
forwarding the taxes to the government.

The high costs of tax collecting for the government have another
unfortunate effect—perhaps not unintended by the powers-that-be. These
costs, readily undertaken by large businesses, impose a
disproportionately heavy and often crippling cost upon the small
employer. The large employer can then cheerfully shoulder the cost
knowing that his small competitor bears far more of the burden.

## THE COURTS [the-courts]

Compulsory labor permeates our legal and judicial structure. Thus, much
venerated judicial procedure rests upon *coerced testimony*. Since it is
axiomatic to libertarianism that all coercion—in this case, all coerced
labor—against everyone except convicted criminals be eliminated, this
means that compulsory testimony must be abolished as well. In recent
years, it is true, the courts have been alive to the Fifth Amendment
protection that no alleged criminal be forced to testify against
himself— to provide the material for his own conviction. The
legislatures have been significantly weakening this protection by
passing immunity laws, offering immunity from prosecution if someone
will testify against his fellows—and, furthermore, compelling the
witness to accept the offer and testify against his associates. But
compelling testimony from anyone for any reason is forced labor—and,
furthermore, is akin to kidnapping, since the person is forced to appear
at the hearing or trial and is then forced to perform the labor of
giving testimony. The problem is not only the recent immunity laws; the
problem is to eliminate *all* coerced testimony, including the universal
subpoenaing of witnesses to a crime, and then forcing them to testify.
In the case of witnesses, there is no question whatever of their being
guilty of a crime, so the use of compulsion against them—a use that no
one has questioned until now—has even less justification than compelling
testimony from accused criminals.

In fact, the entire power to *subpoena* should be abolished, because the
*subpoena* power compels attendance at a trial. Even the accused
criminal or tortfeasor should not be forced to attend his own trial,
since he has not yet been convicted. If he is indeed—according to the
excellent and libertarian principle of Anglo-Saxon law—innocent until
proved guilty, then the courts have no right to compel the defendant to
attend his trial. For remember, the *only* exemption to the Thirteenth
Amendment’s prohibition of involuntary servitude is “except as a
punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted”;
an accused party has not yet been convicted. The most the court should
be able to do, then, is to notify the defendant that he is going to be
tried, and *invite* him or his lawyer to attend; otherwise, if they
choose not to, the trial will proceed *in absentia*. Then, of course,
the defendant will not enjoy the best presentation of his case.

Both the Thirteenth Amendment and the libertarian creed make the
exception for the convicted criminal. The libertarian believes that a
criminal loses his rights to the extent that he has aggressed upon the
rights of another, and therefore that it is permissible to incarcerate
the convicted criminal and subject him to involuntary servitude to that
degree. In the libertarian world, however, the *purpose* of imprisonment
and punishment will undoubtedly be different; there will be no “district
attorney” who presumes to try a case on behalf of a nonexistent
“society,” and then punishes the criminal on “society’s” behalf. In that
world the prosecutor will always represent the *individual victim*, and
punishment will be exacted to redound to the benefit of that victim.
Thus, a crucial focus of punishment will be to force the criminal to
repay, make restitution to, the victim. One such model was a practice in
colonial America. Instead of incarcerating, say, a man who had robbed a
farmer in the district, the criminal was coercively indentured out to
the farmer—in effect, “enslaved” for a term—there to work for the farmer
until his debt was repaid. Indeed, during the Middle Ages, restitution
to the victim was the dominant concept of punishment; only as the State
grew more powerful did the governmental authorities—the kings and the
barons—encroach more and more into the compensation process,
increasingly confiscating more of the criminal’s property for themselves
and neglecting the hapless victim. And as the emphasis shifted from
restitution to punishment for abstract crimes “committed against the
State,” the punishments exacted by the State upon the wrongdoer became
more severe.

As Professor Schafer writes, “As the state monopolized the institution
of punishment, so the rights of the injured were slowly separated from
penal law.” Or, in the words of the turn-of-the-century criminologist
William Tallack, “It was chiefly owing to the violent greed of feudal
barons and medieval ecclesiastical powers that the rights of the injured
party were gradually infringed upon, and finally, to a large extent,
appropriated by these authorities, who exacted a double vengeance,
indeed, upon the offender, by forfeiting his property to themselves
instead of to his victim, and then punishing him by the dungeon, the
torture, the stake or the gibbet. But the original victim of wrong was
practically ignored.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn6)^

At any rate, while the libertarian does not object to prisons *per se*,
he does balk at several practices common to the present judicial and
penal system. One is the lengthy jail term imposed upon the defendant
while awaiting trial. The constitutional right to a “speedy trial” is
not arbitrary but a way of minimizing the length of involuntary
servitude *before* conviction for a crime. In fact, except in those
cases where the criminal has been caught red-handed and where a certain
presumption of guilt therefore exists, it is impossible to justify *any*
imprisonment before conviction, let alone before trial. And even when
someone is caught red-handed, there is an important reform that needs to
be instituted to keep the system honest: subjecting the police and the
other authorities to the same law as everyone else. As will be discussed
further below, if everyone is supposed to be subject to the same
criminal law, then exempting the authorities from that law gives them a
legal license to commit continual aggression. The policeman who
apprehends a criminal and arrests him, and the judicial and penal
authorities who incarcerate him before trial and conviction—all should
be subject to the universal law. In short, if they have committed an
error and the defendant turns out to be innocent, then these authorities
should be subjected to the same penalties as anyone else who kidnaps and
incarcerates an innocent man. Immunity in pursuit of their trade should
no more serve as an excuse than Lieutenant Calley was excused for
committing atrocities at My Lai in the course of the Vietnam
war.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn7)^

The granting of *bail* is a halfhearted attempt to ease the problem of
incarceration before trial, but it is clear that the practice of bail
discriminates against the poor. The discrimination persists even though
the rise of the business of bail-bonding has permitted many more people
to raise bail. The rebuttal that the courts are clogged with cases and
therefore cannot grant a speedy trial is, of course, no defense of the
system; on the contrary, this built-in inefficiency is an excellent
argument for the abolition of government courts.

Furthermore, the setting of bail is arbitrarily in the hands of the
judge, who has excessive and little-checked power to incarcerate people
before they are convicted. This is particularly menacing in the case of
citations for *contempt of court*, because judges have almost unlimited
power to slap someone into prison, after the judge himself has acted as
a one-man prosecutor, judge, and jury in accusing, “convicting,” and
sentencing the culprit completely free from the ordinary rules of
evidence and trial, and in violation of the fundamental legal principle
of not being a judge in one’s own case.

Finally, there is another cornerstone of the judicial system which has
unaccountably gone unchallenged, even by libertarians, for far too long.
This is *compulsory jury service*. There is little difference in kind,
though obviously a great difference in degree, between compulsory jury
duty and conscription; both are enslavement, both compel the individual
to perform tasks on the State’s behalf and at the State’s bidding. And
both are a function of pay at slave wages. Just as the shortage of
voluntary enlistees in the army is a function of a pay scale far below
the market wage, so the abysmally low pay for jury service insures that,
even if jury “enlistments” were possible, not many would be forthcoming.
Furthermore, not only are jurors coerced into attending and serving on
juries, but sometimes they are locked behind closed doors for many
weeks, and prohibited from reading newspapers. What is this but prison
and involuntary servitude for noncriminals?

It will be objected that jury service is a highly important civic
function, and insures a fair trial which a defendant may not obtain from
the judge, especially since the judge is part of the State system and
therefore liable to be partial to the prosecutor’s case. Very true, but
precisely because the service is so vital, it is particularly important
that it be performed by people who do it gladly, and voluntarily. Have
we forgotten that free labor is happier and more efficient than slave
labor? The abolition of jury-slavery should be a vital plank in any
libertarian platform. The judges are not conscripted; neither are the
opposing lawyers; and neither should the jurors.

It is perhaps not a coincidence that, throughout the United States,
lawyers are everywhere exempt from jury service. Since it is almost
always lawyers who write the laws, can we detect class legislation and
class privilege at work?

## COMPULSORY COMMITMENT [12-chap05.html#page111]

One of the most shameful areas of involuntary servitude in our society
is the widespread practice of compulsory commitment, or involuntary
hospitalization, of mental patients. In former generations this
incarceration of noncriminals was frankly carried out as a measure
against mental patients, to remove them from society. The practice of
twentieth-century liberalism has been superficially more humane, but
actually far more insidious: now physicians and psychiatrists help
incarcerate these unfortunates “for their own good.” The humanitarian
rhetoric has permitted a far more widespread use of the practice and,
for one thing, has allowed disgruntled relatives to put away their loved
ones without suffering a guilty conscience.

In the last decade, the libertarian psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Dr.
Thomas S. Szasz has carried on a one-man crusade, at first seemingly
hopeless but now increasingly influential in the psychiatric field,
against compulsory commitment. In numerous books and articles, Dr. Szasz
has delivered a comprehensive and systematic attack on this practice. He
has insisted, for example, that involuntary commitment is a profound
violation of medical ethics. Instead of serving the patient, the
physician here serves others—the family, the State—to act against, and
tyrannize over completely, the person he is supposed to be helping.
Compulsory commitment and compulsory “therapy,” moreover, are far more
likely to aggravate and perpetuate “mental illness” than to cure it. All
too often, Szasz points out, commitment is a device for incarcerating
and thereby disposing of disagreeable relatives rather than a genuine
aid to the patient.

The guiding rationale for compulsory commitment is that the patient
might well be “dangerous to himself or to others.” The first grave flaw
in this approach is that the police, or the law, is stepping in, *not*
when an overt aggressive act is in the process of occurring, but on
someone’s judgment that such an act *might* someday take place. But this
provides an open sesame for unlimited tyranny. Anyone might be adjudged
to be capable of or likely to commit a crime someday, and therefore on
such grounds anyone may legitimately be locked up—not for a crime, but
because someone *thinks* he *might* commit one. This sort of thinking
justifies not only incarceration, but *permanent* incarceration, of
*anyone* under suspicion. But the fundamental libertarian creed holds
that every individual is capable of free will and free choice; that no
one, however likely to commit a crime in the future based on a
statistical or any other judgment, is inevitably determined to do so;
and that, in any case, it is immoral, and itself invasive and criminal,
to coerce anyone who is not an *overt* and present, rather than a
suspected, criminal.

Recently Dr. Szasz was asked, “But don’t you think that society has the
right and the duty to care for those individuals adjudged to be
‘dangerous to themselves and others’?” Szasz cogently replied:

> I think the idea of “helping” people by imprisoning them and doing
> terrible things to them is a religious concept, as the idea of
> “saving” witches by torture and burning once was. As far as
> “dangerousness to self” is concerned, I believe, as did John Stuart
> Mill, that a man’s body and soul are his own, not the state’s. And
> furthermore, that each individual has the “right,” if you will, to do
> with his body as he pleases—so long as he doesn’t harm anyone else, or
> infringe on someone else’s right.
>
> As far as “dangerousness to others” goes, most psychiatrists working
> with hospitalized patients would admit this is pure fantasy. ... There
> have in fact been statistical studies made which show that mental
> patients are much more law-abiding than the normal population.

And civil liberties lawyer Bruce Ennis adds that:

> We know that 85 percent of all ex-convicts will commit more crimes in
> the future and that ghetto residents and teen-age males are far more
> likely to commit crime than the average member of the population. We
> also know, from recent studies, that mental patients are statistically
> *less* dangerous than the average guy. So if what we’re really worried
> about is danger, why don’t we, first, lock up all former convicts, and
> then lock up all ghetto residents, and then why don’t we lock up all
> teen-age males? ... The question Szasz has been asking is: If a person
> hasn’t broken a law, what right has society to lock him
> up?^[8](#24-notes.html#chap05_fn8)^

The involuntarily committed may be divided into two classes: those who
have committed no crime, and those who have. For the former, the
libertarian calls unconditionally for their release. But what of the
latter, what of criminals who, through insanity or other pleas,
supposedly escape the “brutality” of prison punishment and instead
receive medical care at the hands of the State? Here again, Dr. Szasz
has pioneered in a vigorous and devastating critique of the despotism of
liberal “humanitarianism.” First, it is grotesque to claim that
incarceration in a state mental hospital is somehow “more humane” than
equivalent incarceration in prison. On the contrary, the despotism of
the authorities is likely to be more severe, and the prisoner is likely
to have far less recourse in defense of his rights, for as someone
certified as “mentally ill” he is placed into the category of a
“nonperson” whom no one feels obliged to take seriously any longer. As
Dr. Szasz has jocularly said: “Being in a state mental hospital would
drive anyone crazy!”

But furthermore, we must question the entire notion of taking *anyone*
out from under the rule of objective law. To do so is far more likely to
be damaging than helpful to the people thus singled out. Suppose, for
example, that two men, *A* and *B*, commit an equivalent robbery, and
that the usual punishment for this crime is five years in prison.
Suppose that *B* “gets off” this punishment by being declared mentally
ill, and is transferred to a state mental institution. The liberal
focuses on the possibility, say, that *B* may be released in two years
by the State psychiatrist through being adjudged “cured” or
“rehabilitated.” But what if the psychiatrist *never* considers him
cured, or does so only after a very long time? Then *B*, for the simple
crime of theft, may face the horror of lifelong incarceration in a
mental institution. Hence, the “liberal” concept of *indeterminate
sentence*—of sentencing someone not for his objective crime but on the
State’s judgment of his psyche or spirit of cooperation—constitutes
tyranny and dehumanization in its worst form. It is a tyranny,
furthermore, which encourages the prisoner into deceptive behavior to
try to fool the State psychiatrist—whom he perceives quite correctly as
his enemy—into thinking that he is “cured” so that he can get out of
this incarceration. To call this process “therapy” or “rehabilitation”
is surely cruel mockery of these terms. It is far more principled, as
well as more truly humane, to treat every prisoner in accordance with
objective criminal law.

# 6 PERSONAL LIBERTY [13-chap06.html#page115]

## FREEDOM OF SPEECH [freedom-of-speech]

There are, of course, many problems of personal liberty which cannot be
subsumed under the category of “involuntary servitude.” Freedom of
speech and press have long been treasured by those who confine
themselves to being “civil libertarians”—”civil” meaning that economic
freedom and the rights of private property are left out of the equation.
But we have already seen that “freedom of speech” cannot be upheld as an
absolute except as it is subsumed under the general rights of property
of the individual (emphatically *including* property right in his own
person). Thus, the man who shouts “fire” in a crowded theater has no
right to do so because he is aggressing against the contractual property
rights of the theater owner and of the patrons of the performance.

Aside from invasions of property, however, freedom of speech will
necessarily be upheld to the uttermost by every libertarian. Freedom to
say, print, and sell any utterance becomes an absolute right, in
whatever area the speech or expression chooses to cover. Here, civil
libertarians have a generally good record, and in the judiciary the late
Justice Hugo Black was particularly notable in defending freedom of
speech from government restriction on the basis of the First Amendment
of the Constitution.

But there are areas in which even the most ardent civil libertarians
have been unfortunately fuzzy. What, for example, of “incitement to
riot,” in which the speaker is held guilty of a crime for whipping up a
mob, which then riots and commits various actions and crimes against
person and property? In our view, “incitement” can only be considered a
crime if we deny every man’s freedom of will and of choice, and assume
that if *A* tells *B* and *C*: “You and him go ahead and riot!” that
somehow *B* and *C* are then helplessly determined to proceed and commit
the wrongful act. But the libertarian, who believes in freedom of the
will, must insist that while it might be immoral or unfortunate for *A*
to advocate a riot, that this is strictly in the realm of advocacy and
should not be subject to legal penalty. Of course, if *A* also
participates in the riot, then he himself becomes a rioter and is
equally subject to punishment. Furthermore, if *A* is a boss in a
criminal enterprise, and, as part of the crime, orders his henchmen:
“You and him go and rob such and such a bank,” then of course *A,*
according to the law of accessories, becomes a participant or even
leader in the criminal enterprise itself.

If advocacy should never be a crime, then neither should “conspiracy to
advocate,” for, in contrast to the unfortunate development of conspiracy
law, “conspiring” (i.e., agreeing) to do something should never be more
illegal than the act itself. (How, in fact, can “conspiracy” be defined
except as an agreement by two or more people to do something that you,
the definer, do not like?)^[1](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn1)^

Another difficult zone is the law of libel and slander. It has generally
been held legitimate to restrict freedom of speech if that speech has
the effect of either falsely or maliciously damaging the reputation of
another person. What the law of libel and slander does, in short, is to
argue a “property right” of someone in his own reputation. Yet someone’s
“reputation” is not and cannot be “owned” by him, since it is purely a
function of the subjective feelings and attitudes held by other people.
But since no one can ever truly “own the mind and attitude of another,
this means that no one can literally have a property right in his
“reputation.” A person’s reputation fluctuates all the time, in
accordance with the attitudes and opinions of the rest of the
population. Hence, speech attacking someone cannot be an invasion of his
property right and therefore should not be subject to restriction or
legal penalty.

It is, of course, immoral to level false charges against another person,
but once again, the *moral* and the *legal* are, for the libertarian,
two very different categories.

Furthermore, pragmatically, if there were no laws of libel or slander,
people would be much less willing to credit charges without full
documentation than they are now. Nowadays, if a man is charged with some
flaw or misdeed, the general reaction is to believe it, since if the
charge were false, “Why doesn’t he sue for libel?” The law of libel, of
course, discriminates in this way against the poor, since a person with
few financial resources is scarcely as ready to carry on a costly libel
suit as a person of affluent means. Furthermore, wealthy people can now
use the libel laws as a club against poorer persons, restricting
perfectly legitimate charges and utterances under the threat of suing
their poorer enemies for libel. Paradoxically, then, a person of limited
resources is more apt to suffer from libel—and to have his own speech
restricted—in the present system than he would in a world without any
laws against libel or defamation.

Fortunately, in recent years the laws against libel have been
progressively weakened, so that one can now deliver vigorous and
trenchant criticisms of public officials and of people in the public eye
without fear of being subject to costly legal action or legal
punishment.

Another action that should be completely free of restriction is the
boycott. In a boycott, one or more people use their right of speech to
urge, for whatever reasons—important or trivial—that other people cease
to buy someone else’s product. If, for example, several people organize
a campaign—for whatever reason—to urge consumers to stop buying XYZ
Beer, this is again purely advocacy, and, furthermore, advocacy of a
perfectly legitimate act—*not* purchasing the beer. A successful boycott
might be unfortunate for the producers of XYZ Beer, but this, again, is
strictly within the realm of free speech and the rights of private
property. The makers of XYZ Beer take their chances with the free
choices of consumers, and consumers are entitled to listen and to be
swayed by anyone they choose. Yet our labor laws have infringed upon the
right of labor unions to organize boycotts against business firms. It is
also illegal, under our banking laws, to spread rumors about the
insolvency of a bank—an obvious case of the government’s extending
special privileges to banks by outlawing freedom of speech in opposition
to their use.

A particularly thorny question is the whole matter of picketing and
demonstrations. Freedom of speech implies, of course, freedom of
assembly—the freedom to gather together and express oneself in concert
with others. But the situation becomes more complex when the use of the
*streets* is involved. It is clear that picketing is illegitimate when
it is used—as it often is—to block access to a private building or
factory, or when the pickets threaten violence against those who cross
the picket line. It is also clear that sit-ins are an illegitimate
invasion of private property. But even “peaceful picketing” is not
clearly legitimate, for it is part of a wider problem: Who decides on
the use of the streets? The problem stems from the fact that the streets
are almost universally owned by (local) government. But the government,
not being a private owner, lacks any criterion for allocating the use of
its streets, so that any decision it makes will be arbitrary.

Suppose, for example, that the Friends of Wisteria wish to demonstrate
and parade on behalf of Wisteria in a public street. The police ban the
demonstration, claiming that it will clog the streets and disrupt
traffic. Civil libertarians will automatically protest and claim that
the “right of free speech” of the Wisteria demonstrators is being
unjustly abridged. But the police, too, may have a perfectly legitimate
point: the streets may well be clogged, and it is the government’s
responsibility to maintain the flow of traffic. How then decide?
Whichever way the government decides, *some* group of taxpayers will be
injured by the decision. If the government decides to allow the
demonstration, the motorists or pedestrians will be injured; if it does
not, then the Friends of Wisteria will suffer a loss. In either case,
the very fact of government decision-making generates inevitable
conflict over who shall, and who shall not among the taxpayers and
citizens, use the governmental resource.

It is only the universal fact of government ownership and control of the
streets that makes this problem insoluble and cloaks the true solution
to it. The point is that *whoever* owns a resource will decide on how
that resource is to be used. The owner of a press will decide what will
be printed on that press. And the owner of the streets will decide how
to allocate their use. In short, if the streets were privately owned and
the Friends of Wisteria asked for the use of Fifth Avenue to
demonstrate, it will be up to the owner of Fifth Avenue to decide
whether to rent the street for demonstration use or to keep it clear for
traffic. In a purely libertarian world, where all streets are privately
owned, the various street owners will decide, at any given time, whether
to rent out the street for demonstrations, whom to rent it to, and what
price to charge. It would then be clear that what is involved is not a
“free speech” or “free assembly” question at all, but a question of
property rights: of the right of a group to offer to rent a street, and
of the right of the street owner either to accept or reject the offer.

## FREEDOM OF RADIO AND TELEVISION [freedom-of-radio-and-television]

There is one important area of American life where no effective freedom
of speech or the press does or can exist under the present system. That
is the entire field of radio and television. In this area, the federal
government, in the crucially important Radio Act of 1927, nationalized
the airwaves. In effect, the federal government took title to ownership
of all radio and television channels. It then presumed to grant
licenses, at its will or pleasure, for use of the channels to various
privately owned stations. On the one hand, the stations, since they
receive the licenses gratis, do not have to pay for the use of the
scarce airwaves, as they would on the free market. And so these stations
receive a huge subsidy, which they are eager to maintain. But on the
other hand, the federal government, as the licensor of the airwaves,
asserts the right and the power to regulate the stations minutely and
continuously. Thus, over the head of each station is the club of the
threat of nonrenewal, or even suspension, of its license. In
consequence, the idea of freedom of speech in radio and television is no
more than a mockery. Every station is grievously restricted, and forced
to fashion its programming to the dictates of the Federal Communications
Commission. So every station must have “balanced” programming, broadcast
a certain amount of “public service” announcements, grant equal time to
every political candidate for the same office and to expressions of
political opinion, censor “controversial” lyrics in the records it
plays, etc. For many years, no station was allowed to broadcast any
editorial opinion at all; now, every opinion must be balanced by
“responsible” editorial rebuttals.

Because every station and every broadcaster must always look over its
shoulder at the FCC, free expression in broadcasting is a sham. Is it
any wonder that television opinion, when it is expressed at all on
controversial issues, tends to be blandly in favor of the
“Establishment”?

The public has only put up with this situation because it has existed
since the beginning of large-scale commercial radio. But what would we
think, for example, if all newspapers were licensed, the licenses to be
renewable by a Federal Press Commission, and with newspapers losing
their licenses if they dare express an “unfair” editorial opinion, or if
they don’t give full weight to public service announcements? Would not
this be an intolerable, not to say unconstitutional, destruction of the
right to a free press? Or consider if all book publishers had to be
licensed, and their licenses were not renewable if their book lists
failed to suit a Federal Book Commission? Yet what we would all consider
intolerable and totalitarian for the press and the book publishers is
taken for granted in a medium which is now the most popular vehicle for
expression and education: radio and television. Yet the principles in
both cases are exactly the same.

Here we see, too, one of the fatal flaws in the idea of “democratic
socialism,” i.e., the idea that the government should own all resources
and means of production yet preserve and maintain freedom of speech and
the press for all its citizens. An abstract constitution guaranteeing
“freedom of the press” is meaningless in a socialist society. The point
is that where the government owns all the newsprint, the paper, the
presses, etc., the government—as owner—*must* decide how to allocate the
newsprint and the paper, and what to print on them. Just as the
government as street owner must make a decision how the street will be
used, so a socialist government will have to decide how to allocate
newsprint and all other resources involved in the areas of speech and
press: assembly halls, machines, trucks, etc. Any government may profess
its devotion to freedom of the press, yet allocate all of its newsprint
only to its defenders and supporters. A free press is again a mockery;
furthermore, why *should* a socialist government allocate any
considerable amount of its scarce resources to antisocialists? The
problem of genuine freedom of the press then becomes insoluble.

The solution for radio and television? Simple: Treat these media
precisely the same way the press and book publishers are treated. For
both the libertarian and the believer in the American Constitution the
government should withdraw completely from any role or interference in
all media of expression. In short, the federal government should
denationalize the airwaves and give or sell the individual channels to
private ownership. When private stations genuinely own their channels,
they will be truly free and independent; they will be able to put on any
programs they wish to produce, or that they feel their listeners want to
hear; and they will be able to express themselves in whichever way they
wish without fear of government retaliation. They will also be able to
sell or rent the airwaves to whomever they wish, and in that way the
users of the channels will no longer be artificially subsidized.

Furthermore, if TV channels become free, privately owned, and
independent, the big networks will no longer be able to put pressure
upon the FCC to outlaw the effective competition of pay-television. It
is only because the FCC has outlawed pay-TV that it has not been able to
gain a foothold. “Free TV” is, of course, not truly “free”; the programs
are paid for by the advertisers, and the consumer pays by covering the
advertising costs in the price of the product he buys. One might ask
what difference it makes to the consumer whether he pays the advertising
costs indirectly or pays directly for each program he buys. The
difference is that these are not the same consumers for the same
products. The television advertiser, for example, is always interested
in (a) gaining the widest possible viewing market; and (b) in gaining
those *particular* viewers who will be most susceptible to his message.
Hence, the programs will all be geared to the lowest common denominator
in the audience, and particularly to those viewers most susceptible to
the message; that is, those viewers who do not read newspapers or
magazines, so that the message will not duplicate the ads he sees there.
As a result, free-TV programs tend to be unimaginative, bland, and
uniform. Pay-TV would mean that each program would search for its own
market, and many specialized markets for specialized audiences would
develop—just as highly lucrative specialized markets have developed in
the magazine and book publishing fields. The quality of programs would
be higher and the offerings far more diverse. In fact, the menace of
potential pay-TV competition must be great for the networks to lobby for
years to keep it suppressed. But, of course, in a truly free market,
both forms of television, as well as cable-TV and other forms we cannot
yet envision, could and would enter the competition.

One common argument against private ownership of TV channels is that
these channels are “scarce,” and therefore have to be owned and
parcelled out by the government. To an economist, this is a silly
argument; *all* resources are scarce, in fact anything that has a price
on the market commands that price precisely *because* it is scarce. We
have to pay a certain amount for a loaf of bread, for shoes, for dresses
*because* they are all scarce. If they were not scarce but superabundant
like air, they would be free, and no one would have to worry about their
production or allocation. In the press area, newsprint is scarce, paper
is scarce, printing machinery and trucks are scarce, etc. The more
scarce they are the higher the price they will command, and vice versa.
Furthermore, and again pragmatically, there are far more television
channels available than are now in use. The FCC’s early decision to
force stations into the VHF instead of the UHF zone created far more of
a scarcity of channels than there needed to be.

Another common objection to private property in the broadcast media is
that private stations would interfere with each other’s broadcasts, and
that such widespread interference would virtually prevent any programs
from being heard or seen. But this is as absurd an argument for
nationalizing the airwaves as claiming that since people *can* drive
their cars over other people’s land this means that all cars—or
land—must be nationalized. The problem, in either case, is for the
courts to demarcate property titles carefully enough so that any
invasion of another’s property will be clear-cut and subject to
prosecution. In the case of land titles, this process is clear enough.
But the point is that the courts can apply a similar process of staking
out property rights in other areas—whether it be in airwaves, in water,
or in oil pools. In the case of airwaves, the task is to find the
technological unit—i.e., the place of transmission, the distance of the
wave, and the technological width of a clear channel—and then to
allocate property rights to this particular technological unit. If radio
station WXYZ, for example, is assigned a property right in broadcasting
on 1500 kilocycles, plus or minus a certain width of kilocycles, for 200
miles around Detroit, then any station which subsequently beams a
program into the Detroit area on this wavelength would be subject to
prosecution for interference with property rights. If the courts pursue
their task of demarking and defending property rights, then there is no
more reason to expect continual invasions of such rights in this area
than anywhere else.

Most people believe that this is precisely the reason the airwaves were
nationalized; that before the Radio Act of 1927, stations interfered
with each other’s signals and chaos ensued, and the federal government
was finally forced to step in to bring order and make a radio industry
feasible at last. But this is historical legend, not fact. The actual
history is *precisely the opposite*. For when interference on the same
channel began to occur, the injured party took the airwave aggressors
into court, and the courts were beginning to bring order out of the
chaos by very successfully applying the common law theory of property
rights—in very many ways similar to the libertarian theory—to this new
technological area. In short, the courts were beginning to assign
property rights in the airwaves to their “homesteading” users. It was
after the federal government saw the likelihood of this new extension of
private property that it rushed in to nationalize the airwaves, using
alleged chaos as the excuse.

To describe the picture a bit more fully, radio in the first years of
the century was almost wholly a means of communication for ships—either
ship-to-ship or ship-to-shore messages. The Navy Department was
interested in regulating radio as a means of ensuring safety at sea, and
the initial federal regulation, a 1912 act, merely provided that any
radio station had to have a license issued by the Secretary of Commerce.
No powers to regulate or to decide not to renew licenses were written
into the law, however, and when public broadcasting began in the early
1920s, Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover attempted to regulate the
stations. Court decisions in 1923 and 1926, however, struck down the
government’s power to regulate licenses, to fail to renew them, or even
to decide on which wavelengths the stations should
operate.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn2)^ At about the same time, the
courts were working out the concept of “homestead” private property
rights in the airwaves, notably in the case of *Tribune Co. v. Oak
Leaves Broadcasting* *Station* (Circuit Court, Cook County, Illinois,
1926). In this case the court held that the operator of an existing
station had a property right, acquired by prior use, sufficient to
enjoin a new station from using a radio frequency in any way so as to
cause interference with the signals of the prior
station.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn3)^ And so order was being brought
out of the chaos by means of the assignment of property rights. But it
was precisely this development that the government rushed in to
forestall.

The 1926 Zenith decision striking down the government’s power to
regulate or to fail to renew licenses, and forcing the Department of
Commerce to issue licenses to any station that applied, produced a great
boom in the broadcasting industry. Over two hundred new stations were
created in the nine months after the decision. As a result, Congress
rushed through a stopgap measure in July 1926 to *prevent* any property
rights in radio frequencies, and resolved that all licenses should be
limited to 90 days. By February 1927 the Congress passed the law
establishing the Federal Radio Commission, which nationalized the
airwaves and established powers similar to those of the current FCC.
That the aim of the knowledgeable politicians was *not* to prevent chaos
but to prevent private property in the airwaves as the solution to chaos
is demonstrated by the legal historian H.P. Warner. Warner states that
“grave fears were expressed by legislators, and those generally charged
with the administration of communications... that government regulation
of an effective sort might be permanently prevented through the accrual
of property rights in licenses or means of access, and that thus
franchises of the value of millions of dollars might be established for
all time.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn4)^ The net result, however, was
to establish equally valuable franchises anyway, but in a monopolistic
fashion through the largesse of the Federal Radio Commission and later
FCC rather than through competitive homesteading.

Among the numerous direct invasions of freedom of speech exercised by
the licensing power of the FRC and FCC, two cases will suffice. One was
in 1931, when the FRC denied renewal of license to a Mr. Baker, who
operated a radio station in Iowa. In denying renewal, the Commission
said:

> This Commission holds no brief for the Medical Associations and other
> parties whom Mr. Baker does not like. Their alleged sins may be at
> times of public importance, to be called to the attention of the
> public over the air in the right way. But this record discloses that
> Mr. Baker does not do so in any high-minded way. It shows that he
> continually and erratically over the air rides a personal hobby, his
> cancer cure ideas and his likes and dislikes of certain persons and
> things. Surely his infliction of all this on the listeners is not the
> proper use of a broadcasting license. Many of his utterances are
> vulgar, if not indeed indecent. Assuredly they are not uplifting or
> entertaining.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn5)^

Can we imagine the outcry if the federal government were to put a
newspaper or a book publisher out of business on similar grounds?

A recent act of the FCC was to threaten nonrenewal of license of radio
station KTRG in Honolulu, a major radio station in Hawaii. KTRG had been
broadcasting libertarian programs for several hours a day for
approximately two years. Finally, in late 1970, the FCC decided to open
lengthy hearings moving toward nonrenewal of license, the threatened
cost of which forced the owners to shut down the station
permanently.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn6)^

## PORNOGRAPHY [13-chap06.html#page127]

To the libertarian, the arguments between conservatives and liberals
over laws prohibiting pornography are distressingly beside the point.
The conservative position tends to hold that pornography is debasing and
immoral and therefore should be outlawed. Liberals tend to counter that
sex is good and healthy and that therefore pornography will only have
good effects, and that depictions of violence—say on television, in
movies, or in comic books—should be outlawed instead. Neither side deals
with the crucial point: that the good, bad, or indifferent consequences
of pornography, while perhaps an interesting problem in its own right,
is completely irrelevant to the question of whether or not it should be
outlawed. The libertarian holds that it is not the business of the
law—the use of retaliatory violence—to enforce anyone’s conception of
morality. It is not the business of the law—even if this were
practically possible, which is, of course, most unlikely—to make anyone
good or reverent or moral or clean or upright. This is for each
individual to decide for himself. It is only the business of legal
violence to defend people against the use of violence, to defend them
from violent invasions of their person or property. But if the
government presumes to outlaw pornography, it *itself* becomes the
genuine outlaw—for it is invading the property rights of people to
produce, sell, buy, or possess pornographic material.

We do not pass laws to make people upright; we do not pass laws to force
people to be kind to their neighbors or not to yell at the bus driver;
we do not pass laws to force people to be honest with their loved ones.
We do not pass laws to force them to eat X amount of vitamins per day.
Neither is it the business of government, nor of any legal agency, to
pass laws against the voluntary production or sale of pornography.
Whether pornography is good, bad, or indifferent should be of no
interest to the legal authorities.

The same holds true for the liberal bugbear of “the pornography of
violence.” Whether or not watching violence on television helps lead to
actual crimes should not come under the purview of the State. To outlaw
violent films because they *might* someday induce someone to commit a
crime is a denial of man’s free will, and a total denial, of course, of
the right of those who will *not* commit crimes to see the film. But
more important, it is no more justifiable—in fact, less so—to outlaw
violent films for this reason than it would be, as we have noted, to
lock up all teenage Negro males because they have a greater tendency to
commit crime than the rest of the population.

It should be clear, too, that prohibition of pornography is an invasion
of property right, of the right to produce, sell, buy, and own.
Conservatives who call for the outlawing of pornography do not seem to
realize that they are thereby violating the very concept of property
rights they profess to champion. It is also a violation of freedom of
the press, which, as we have seen, is really a subset of the general
right of private property.

Sometimes it seems that the *beau ideal* of many conservatives, as well
as of many liberals, is to put everyone into a cage and coerce him into
doing what the conservatives or liberals believe to be the moral thing.
They would of course be differently styled cages, but they would be
cages just the same. The conservative would ban illicit sex, drugs,
gambling, and impiety, and coerce everyone to act according to his
version of moral and religious behavior. The liberal would ban films of
violence, unesthetic advertising, football, and racial discrimination,
and, at the extreme, place everyone in a “Skinner box” to be run by a
supposedly benevolent liberal dictator. But the effect would be the
same: to reduce everyone to a subhuman level and to deprive everyone of
the most precious part of his or her humanity—the freedom to choose.

The irony, of course, is that by forcing men to be “moral”—i.e., to
*act* morally—the conservative or liberal jailkeepers would in reality
deprive men of the very *possibility* of being moral. The concept of
“morality” makes no sense unless the moral act is freely chosen.
Suppose, for example, that someone is a devout Muslim who is anxious to
have as many people as possible bow to Mecca three times a day; to him
let us suppose this is the highest moral act. But if he wields coercion
to *force* everyone to bow to Mecca, he is thereby depriving everyone of
the opportunity to be moral—to *choose freely* to bow to Mecca. Coercion
deprives a man of the freedom to choose and, therefore, of the
possibility of choosing morally.

The libertarian, in contrast to so many conservatives and liberals, does
not want to place man in any cage. What he wants for everyone is
freedom, the freedom to act morally or immorally, as each man shall
decide.

## SEX LAWS [sex-laws]

In recent years, liberals have fortunately been coming to the conclusion
that “any act between two (or more) consenting adults” should be legal.
It is unfortunate that the liberals have not yet widened this criterion
from sex to trade and exchange, for if they ever would, they would be
close to becoming full-scale libertarians. For the libertarian is
precisely interested in legalizing all interrelations whatever between
“consenting adults.” Liberals have also begun to call for the abolition
of “victimless crimes,” which would be splendid if “victims” were
defined with greater precision as victims of aggressive violence.

Since sex is a uniquely private aspect of life, it is particularly
intolerable that governments should presume to regulate and legislate
sexual behavior, yet of course this has been one of the State’s favorite
pastimes. Violent acts such as rape, of course, are to be classed as
crimes in the same way as any other act of violence against persons.

Oddly enough, while voluntary sexual activities have often been rendered
illegal and prosecuted by the State, accused rapists have been treated
far more gently by the authorities than accused perpetrators of other
forms of bodily assault. In many instances, in fact, the rape victim has
been virtually treated as the guilty party by the law enforcement
agencies—an attitude which is almost never taken toward victims of other
crimes. Clearly, an impermissible sexual double standard has been at
work. As the National Board of the American Civil Liberties Union
declared in March 1977:

> Sexual assault victims should he treated no differently from victims
> of other crimes. Sexual assault victims are often treated with
> skepticism and abuse at the hands of law enforcement and health
> services personnel. This treatment ranges from official disbelief and
> insensitivity to cruel and harsh probes of the victim’s lifestyle and
> motivation. Such abrogation of responsibility by institutions meant to
> assist and protect victims of crime can only compound the trauma of
> the victim’s original experience.

The double standard imposed by government can be remedied by removing
rape as a special category of legal and judicial treatment, and of
subsuming it under the general law of bodily assault. Whatever standards
are used for judges’ instructions to the jury, or for the admissibility
of evidence, should be applied similarly in all these cases.

If labor and persons in general are to be free, then so should there be
freedom for *prostitution*. Prostitution is a voluntary sale of a labor
service, and the government has no right to prohibit or restrict such
sales. It should be noted that many of the grimmer aspects of the
streetwalking trade have been brought about by the outlawing of
brothels. As long-lasting houses of prostitution operated by madams
anxious to cultivate goodwill among customers over a long time span,
brothels used to compete to provide high-quality service and build up
their “brand name.” The outlawing of brothels has forced prostitution
into a “black-market,” fly-by-night existence, with all the dangers and
general decline in quality this always entails. Recently, in New York
City, there has been a tendency for the police to crack down on
prostitution with the excuse that the trade is no longer “victimless,”
since many prostitutes commit crimes against their customers. To outlaw
trades that may attract crime, however, would in the same way justify
prohibition because many fights take place in bars. The answer is not to
outlaw the voluntary and truly lawful activity, but for the police to
see to it that the genuine crimes do not get committed. It should be
clear that advocacy of freedom for prostitution does not, for the
libertarian, in the least imply advocacy of prostitution itself. In
short, if a particularly puritanical government were to outlaw all
cosmetics, the libertarian would call for legalizing cosmetics without
in any sense implying that he favors—or for that matter, opposes—the use
of cosmetics themselves. On the contrary, depending upon his personal
ethics or esthetics, he might well agitate against the use of cosmetics
after they become legalized; his attempt is always to persuade rather
than to compel.

If sex should be free, then *birth control* should, of course, be free
as well. It is unfortunately characteristic of our society, however,
that scarcely has birth control been made legal when people—in this case
liberals—arise to agitate for birth control being made *compulsory*. It
is true, of course, that if my neighbor has a baby this may well affect
me for good or ill. But, then, almost everything that anyone does may
affect one or more people. To the libertarian, this is scarcely
justification for using force, which may *only* be used to combat or
restrain force itself. There is no right more personal, no freedom more
precious, than for any woman to decide to have, or not to have, a baby,
and it is totalitarian in the extreme for any government to presume to
deny her that right. Besides, if any family has more children than it
can support in comfort, the family itself will bear the main burden;
hence, the almost universal result that the wish to preserve a treasured
rise in living standards will induce a voluntary reduction of births by
the families themselves.

This brings us to the more complex case of *abortion*. For the
libertarian, the “Catholic” case against abortion, even if finally
rejected as invalid, cannot be dismissed out of hand. For the essence of
that case—not really “Catholic” at all in a theological sense—is that
abortion destroys a human life and is therefore murder, and hence cannot
be condoned. More than that, if abortion is truly murder, then the
Catholic—or any other person who shares this view—cannot just shrug his
shoulders and say that “Catholic” views should not be imposed upon
non-Catholics. Murder is not an expression of religious preference; no
sect, in the name of “freedom of religion,” can or should get away with
committing murder with the plea that its religion so commands. The vital
question then becomes: Should abortion be considered as murder?

Most discussion of the issue bogs down in *minutiae* about *when* human
life begins, when or if the fetus can be considered to be alive, etc.
All this is really irrelevant to the issue of the *legality* (again, not
necessarily the *morality*) of abortion. The Catholic antiabortionist,
for example, declares that all that he wants for the fetus is the rights
of any human being—i.e., the right not to be murdered. But there is more
involved here, and this is the crucial consideration. If we are to treat
the fetus as having the same rights as humans, then let us ask: What
*human* has the right to remain, unbidden, as an unwanted parasite
within some other human being’s body? This is the nub of the issue: the
absolute right of every person and hence every woman, to the ownership
of her own body. What the mother is doing in an abortion is causing an
unwanted entity within her body to be ejected from it: If the fetus
dies, this does not rebut the point that no being has a right to live,
unbidden, as a parasite within or upon some person’s body.

The common retort that the mother either originally wanted or at least
was responsible for placing the fetus within her body is, again, beside
the point. Even in the stronger case where the mother originally wanted
the child, the mother, as the property owner in her own body, has the
right to change her mind and to eject it.

If the State should not repress voluntary sexual activity, neither
should it discriminate for or against either sex. “Affirmative action”
decrees are an obvious way of compelling discrimination against males or
other groups in employment, admissions, or wherever this implicit quota
system is applied. But “protective” labor laws in regard to women
insidiously pretend to favor women when they really discriminate against
them by prohibiting them from working during certain hours or in certain
occupations. Women are prevented by law from exercising their individual
freedom of choice in deciding for themselves whether or not to enter
these occupations or to work during these supposedly onerous hours. In
this way, government prevents women from competing freely against men in
these areas.

All in all, the 1978 Libertarian Party platform is trenchant and to the
point in setting forth the libertarian position on governmental sex or
other discrimination: “No individual rights should be denied or abridged
by the laws of the United States or any state or locality on account of
sex, race, color, creed, age, national origin, or sexual preference.”

## WIRETAPPING [wiretapping]

Wiretapping is a contemptible invasion of privacy and of property right,
and of course should be outlawed as an invasive act. Few, if any, people
would condone private wiretapping. The controversy arises with those who
maintain that the police should be able to tap the wires of persons they
*suspect* as criminals. Otherwise, how would criminals be caught?

In the first place, from the pragmatic viewpoint, it is rare that
wiretapping is effective in such “one-shot” crimes as bank robbery.
Wiretapping is generally used in cases where the “business” is set up on
a regularized and continuing basis—such as narcotics and gambling—and is
therefore vulnerable to espionage and “bugging.” Secondly, we remain
with our contention that it is itself criminal to invade the property of
anyone not yet convicted of a crime. It may well be true, for example,
that if the government employed a ten-million man espionage force to spy
upon and tap the wires of the entire population, the total amount of
private crime would be reduced—just as it would if all ghetto residents
or teenage males were promptly incarcerated. But what would this be
compared to the mass crime that would thus be committed, legally and
without shame, by the government itself?

There is one concession we might make to the police argument, but it is
doubtful the police would be happy with the concession. It is proper to
invade the property of a thief, for example, who has himself invaded to
a far greater extent the property of others. Suppose the police decide
that John Jones is a jewel thief. They tap his wires, and use this
evidence to convict Jones of the crime. We might say that this tapping
is legitimate, and should go unpunished: *provided,* however, that if
Jones should prove *not* to be a thief, the police and the judges who
may have issued the court order for the tap are now to be adjudged
*criminals themselves* and sent to jail for their crime of unjust
wiretapping. This reform would have two happy consequences: no policeman
or judge would participate in wiretapping unless he was dead certain the
victim is indeed a criminal; and the police and judges would at last
join everyone else as equally subject to the rule of the criminal law.
Certainly equality of liberty requires that the law applies to everyone;
therefore any invasion of the property of a non-criminal by *anyone*
should be outlawed, regardless of who committed the deed. The policeman
who guessed wrong and thereby aggressed against a noncriminal should
therefore be considered just as guilty as any “private” wiretapper.

## GAMBLING [gambling]

There are few laws more absurd and iniquitous than the laws against
gambling. In the first place, the law, in its broadest sense, is clearly
unenforceable. If every time Jim and Jack made a quiet bet on a football
game, or on an election, or on virtually anything else, this were
illegal, an enormous multi-million-man gestapo would be required to
enforce such a law and to spy on everyone and ferret out every bet.
Another large super-espionage force would then be needed to spy on the
spies to make sure that they have not been bought off. Conservatives
like to retort to such arguments—used against laws outlawing sexual
practices, pornography, drugs, etc.—that the prohibition against murder
is not fully enforceable either, but this is no argument for repeal of
*that* law. This argument, however, ignores a crucial point: the mass of
the public, making an instinctive libertarian distinction, abhors and
condemns murder and does not engage in it; hence, the prohibition
becomes broadly enforceable. But the mass of the public is not as
convinced of the criminality of gambling, hence continues to engage in
it, and the law—properly—becomes unenforceable.

Since the laws against quiet betting are clearly unenforceable, the
authorities decide to concentrate on certain highly *visible* forms of
gambling, and confine their activities to them: roulette, bookies,
“numbers” betting—in short, on those areas where gambling is a fairly
regularized activity. But then we have a peculiar and surely totally
unsupportable kind of ethical judgment: roulette, horse betting, etc.,
are somehow morally evil and must be cracked down upon by the massed
might of the police, whereas quiet betting is morally legitimate and
need not be bothered.

In New York State, a particular form of imbecility developed over the
years: until recent years, all forms of horse betting were illegal
*except* those made at the tracks themselves. Why horse betting at
Aqueduct or Belmont race track should be perfectly moral and legitimate
while betting on the same race with your friendly neighborhood bookie
should be sinful and bring down the awful majesty of the law defies the
imagination. Unless, of course, if we consider the point of the law to
force betters to swell the coffers of the tracks. Recently, a new
wrinkle has developed. The City of New York has *itself* gone into the
horse-betting business, and betting at city-owned stores is perfectly
fine and proper, while betting with competing private bookies continues
to be sinful and outlawed. Clearly, the point of the system is first to
confer a special privilege upon the race tracks, and then upon the
city’s own betting installation. Various states are also beginning to
finance their ever-growing expenditures through lotteries, which thus
become conferred with the cloak of morality and respectability.

A standard argument for outlawing gambling is that, if the poor workman
is allowed to gamble, he will improvidently blow his weekly paycheck and
thereby render his family destitute. Aside from the fact that he can now
spend his payroll on friendly betting, this paternalistic and
dictatorial argument is a curious one. For it proves far too much: If we
must outlaw gambling because the masses might spend too much of their
substance, why should we not outlaw many other articles of mass
consumption? After all, if a workman is determined to blow his paycheck,
he has many opportunities to do so: he can improvidently spend too much
on a TV set, a hi-fi, liquor, baseball equipment, and countless other
goodies. The logic of prohibiting a man from gambling for his own or his
family’s good leads straight to that totalitarian cage, the cage in
which Pappa Government tells the man exactly what to do, how to spend
his money, how many vitamins he must ingest, and forces him to obey the
State’s dictates.

## NARCOTICS AND OTHER DRUGS [narcotics-and-other-drugs]

The case for outlawing any product or activity is essentially the same
twofold argument we have seen used to justify the compulsory commitment
of mental patients: it will harm the person involved, or it will lead
that person to commit crimes against others. It is curious that the
general—and justified—horror of drugs has led the mass of the public to
an irrational enthusiasm for outlawing them. The case against outlawing
narcotic and hallucinogenic drugs is far weaker than the case against
Prohibition, an experiment which the grisly era of the 1920s has
hopefully discredited for all time. For while narcotics are undoubtedly
more harmful than is alcohol, the latter can also be harmful, and
outlawing something because it may harm the user leads straight down the
logical garden path to our totalitarian cage, where people are
prohibited from eating candy and are forced to eat yogurt “for their own
good.” But in the far more imposing argument about harm to others,
alcohol is much more likely to lead to crimes, auto accidents, etc.,
than narcotics, which render the user preternaturally peaceful and
passive. There is, of course, a very strong connection between addiction
and crime, but the connection is the *reverse* of any argument for
prohibition. Crimes are committed by addicts driven to theft by the high
price of drugs caused by the outlawry itself! If narcotics were legal,
the supply would greatly increase, the high costs of black markets and
police payoffs would disappear, and the price would be low enough to
eliminate most addict-caused crime.

This is not to argue, of course, for prohibition of alcohol; once again,
to outlaw something which *might* lead to crime is an illegitimate and
invasive assault on the rights of person and property, an assault which,
again, would far more justify the immediate incarceration of all teenage
males. Only the overt commission of a crime should be illegal, and the
way to combat crimes committed under the influence of alcohol is to be
more diligent about the crimes themselves, not to outlaw the alcohol.
And this would have the further beneficial effect of reducing crimes
*not* committed under the influence of alcohol.

Paternalism in this area comes not only from the right; it is curious
that while liberals generally favor legalizing marijuana and sometimes
of heroin, they seem to yearn to outlaw cigarettes, on the ground that
cigarette smoking often causes cancer. Liberals have already managed to
use federal control of television to outlaw cigarette advertising on
that medium—and thereby to level a grave blow against the very freedom
of speech liberals are supposed to cherish.

Once again: Every man has the right to choose. Propagandize against
cigarettes as much as you want, but leave the individual free to run his
own life. Otherwise, we may as well outlaw all sorts of possible
carcinogenic agents—including tight shoes, improperly fitting false
teeth, excessive exposure to the sun, as well as excessive intake of ice
cream, eggs, and butter which might lead to heart disease. And, if such
prohibitions *prove unenforceable*, again the logic is to place people
in cages so that they will receive the proper amount of sun, the correct
diet, properly fitting shoes, and so on.

## POLICE CORRUPTION [police-corruption]

In the fall of 1971, the Knapp Commission focussed public attention on
the problem of widespread police corruption in New York City. Midst the
drama of individual cases, there is a danger of overlooking what is
clearly the central problem, a problem of which the Knapp Commission
itself was perfectly aware. In virtually every case of corruption, the
policemen were involved in regularly functioning businesses which, by
government fiat, had been declared illegal. And yet a vast number of
people, by demanding these goods and services, have shown that they do
not agree that such activities should be placed in the same category as
murder, theft, or assault. Indeed, in practically no case did the
“purchase” of the police involve these heinous crimes. In almost all
cases, they consisted of the police looking the other way while
legitimate, voluntary transactions took place.

The common law makes a vital distinction between a crime that is a
*malum in se* and one that is merely a *malum prohibitum*. A *malum in
se* is an act which the mass of the people instinctively feel is a
reprehensible crime which should be punished. This coincides roughly
with the libertarians’ definition of a crime as an invasion of person or
property: assault, theft, and murder. Other crimes are activities made
into crimes by government edict: it is in this far more widely tolerated
area that police corruption occurs.

In short, police corruption occurs in those areas where entrepreneurs
supply voluntary services to consumers, but where the government has
decreed that these services are illegal: narcotics, prostitution, and
gambling. Where gambling, for example, is outlawed, the law places into
the hands of the police assigned to the gambling detail the power to
sell the privilege of engaging in the gambling business. In short, it is
as if the police were empowered to issue special licenses to engage in
these activities, and then proceeded to sell these unofficial but vital
licenses at whatever price the traffic will bear. One policeman
testified that, if the law were to be fully enforced, not a single
construction site in New York City could continue functioning, so
intricately did the government wrap construction sites in a web of
trivial and impossible regulations. In short, whether consciously or
not, the government proceeds as follows: first it outlaws a certain
activity—drugs, gambling, construction, or whatever—then the
governmental police sell to would-be entrepreneurs in the field the
privilege of entering and continuing in business.

At best, the result of these actions is the imposition of higher cost,
and more restricted output, of the activity than would have occurred in
a free market. But the effects are still more pernicious. Often, what
the policemen sell is not just permission to function, but what is in
effect a privileged monopoly. In that case, a gambler pays off the
police not just to continue in business but also to freeze out any
competitors who might want to enter the industry. The consumers are then
saddled with privileged monopolists, and are barred from enjoying the
advantages of competition. It is no wonder, then, that when Prohibition
was finally repealed in the early 1930s, the main opponents of repeal
were, along with fundamentalist and Prohibitionist groups, the organized
bootleggers, who had enjoyed special monopolistic privileges from their
special arrangements with the police and other enforcement arms of
government.

The way, then, to eliminate police corruption is simple but effective:
abolish the laws against voluntary business activity and against all
“victimless crimes.” Not only would corruption be eliminated, but a
large number of police would then be freed to operate against the *real*
criminals, the aggressors against person and property. This, after all,
is supposed to be the function of the police in the first place.

We should realize, then, that the problem of police corruption, as well
as the broader question of government corruption in general, should be
placed in a wider context. The point is that *given* the unfortunate and
unjust laws prohibiting, regulating, and taxing certain activities,
corruption is highly beneficial to society. In a number of countries,
without corruption that nullified government prohibitions, taxes, and
exactions, virtually no trade or industry would be carried on at all.
Corruption greases the wheels of trade. The solution, then, is not to
deplore corruption and redouble enforcement against it, but to abolish
the crippling policies and laws of government that make corruption
necessary.

## GUN LAWS [gun-laws]

For most of the activities in this chapter, liberals tend to favor
freedom of trade and activity while conservatives yearn for rigorous
enforcement and maximum crackdowns against violators of the law. Yet,
mysteriously, in the drive for gun laws the positions tend to be
reversed. Every time a gun is used in a violent crime, liberals redouble
their agitation for the severe restriction, if not prohibition of
private ownership of guns, while conservatives oppose such restrictions
on behalf of individual freedom.

If, as libertarians believe, every individual has the right to own his
person and property, it then follows that he has the right to employ
violence to defend himself against the violence of criminal aggressors.
But for some odd reason, liberals have systematically tried to deprive
innocent persons of the means for defending themselves against
aggression. Despite the fact that the Second Amendment to the
Constitution guarantees that “the right of the people to keep and bear
arms shall not be infringed,” the government has systematically eroded
much of this right. Thus, in New York State, as in most other states,
the Sullivan Law prohibits the carrying of “concealed weapons” without a
license issued by the authorities. Not only has the carrying of guns
been grievously restricted by this unconstitutional edict, but the
government has extended this prohibition to almost any object that could
possibly serve as a weapon—even those that could only be used for
self-defense. As a result, potential victims of crime have been barred
from carrying knives, tear-gas pens, or even hatpins, and people who
have used such weapons in defending themselves against assault have
themselves been prosecuted by the authorities. In the cities, this
invasive prohibition against concealed weapons has in effect stripped
victims of any possible self-defense against crime. (It is true that
there is no official prohibition against carrying an *unconcealed*
weapon, but a man in New York City who, several years ago, tested the
law by walking the streets carrying a rifle was promptly arrested for
“disturbing the peace.”) Furthermore, victims are so hamstrung by
provisions against “undue” force in self-defense that the criminal is
automatically handed an enormous built-in advantage by the existing
legal system.

It should be clear that no physical object is *in itself* aggressive;
*any* object, whether it be a gun, a knife, or a stick, can be used for
aggression, for defense, or for numerous other purposes unconnected with
crime. It makes no more sense to outlaw or restrict the purchase and
ownership of guns than it does to outlaw the possession of knives,
clubs, hatpins, or stones. And how are all of these objects to be
outlawed, and if outlawed, how is the prohibition to be enforced?
Instead of pursuing innocent people carrying or possessing various
objects, then, the law should be concerned with combatting and
apprehending real criminals.

There is, moreover, another consideration which reinforces our
conclusion. If guns are restricted or outlawed, there is no reason to
expect that determined criminals are going to pay much attention to the
law. The criminals, then, will always be able to purchase and carry
guns; it will only be their innocent victims who will suffer from the
solicitous liberalism that imposes laws against guns and other weapons.
Just as drugs, gambling, and pornography should be made legal, so too
should guns and any other objects that might serve as weapons of
self-defense.

In a notable article attacking control of handguns (the type of gun
liberals most want to restrict), St. Louis University law professor Don
B. Kates, Jr., chides his fellow liberals for not applying the same
logic to guns that they use for marijuana laws. Thus, he points out that
there are over 50 million handgun owners in America today, and that,
based on polls and past experience, from two-thirds to over 80 percent
of Americans would fail to comply with a ban on handguns. The inevitable
result, as in the case of sex and marijuana laws, would be harsh
penalties and yet highly selective enforcement—breeding disrespect for
the law and law enforcement agencies. And the law would be enforced
selectively against those people whom the authorities didn’t like:
“Enforcement becomes progressively more haphazard until at last the laws
are used only against those who are unpopular with the police. We hardly
need to be reminded of the odious search and seizure tactics police and
government agents have often resorted to in order to trap violators of
these laws.” Kates adds that “if these arguments seem familiar, it is
probably because they parallel the standard liberal argument against pot
laws.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn7)^

Kates then adds a highly perceptive insight into this curious liberal
blind spot. For:

> Gun prohibition is the brainchild of white middle-class liberals who
> are oblivious to the situation of poor and minority people living in
> areas where the police have given up on crime control. Such liberals
> weren’t upset about marijuana laws, either, in the fifties when the
> busts were confined to the ghettos. Secure in well-policed suburbs or
> high-security apartments guarded by Pinkertons (whom no one proposes
> to disarm), the oblivious liberal derides gun ownership as “an
> anachronism from the Old West.”^[8](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn8)^

Kates further points out the demonstrated empirical value of
self-defense armed with guns; in Chicago, for example, armed civilians
justifiably killed three times as many violent criminals in the past
five years as did the police. And, in a study of several hundred violent
confrontations with criminals, Kates found the armed civilians to be
more successful than the police: the civilians defending themselves
captured, wounded, killed, or scared off criminals in 75 percent of the
confrontations, whereas the police only had a 61 percent success rate.
It is true that victims who resist robbery are more likely to be injured
than those who remain passive. But Kates points out neglected
qualifiers: (1) that resistance without a gun has been twice as
hazardous to the victim than resistance with one, and (2) that the
choice of resistance is up to the victim and his circumstances and
values.

> Avoiding injury will be paramount to a white, liberal academic with a
> comfortable bank account. It will necessarily be less important to the
> casual laborer or welfare recipient who is being robbed of the
> wherewithal to support his family for a month—or to a black shopkeeper
> who can’t get robbery insurance and will be literally run out of
> business by successive robberies.

And the 1975 national survey of handgun owners by the Decision Making
Information organization found that the leading subgroups who own a gun
*only* for self-defense include blacks, the lowest income groups, and
senior citizens. “These are the people,” Kates eloquently warns, “it is
proposed we jail because they insist on keeping the only protection
available for their families in areas in which the police have given
up.”^[9](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn9)^

What of historical experience? Have handgun bans really greatly lowered
the degree of violence in society, as liberals claim? The evidence is
precisely to the contrary. A massive study done at the University of
Wisconsin concluded unequivocally in the fall of 1975 that “gun control
laws have no individual or collective effect in reducing the rate of
violent crime.” The Wisconsin study, for example, tested the theory that
ordinarily peaceful people will be irresistibly tempted to shoot their
guns if available when tempers are being frayed. The study found *no
correlation whatever* between rates of handgun ownership and rates of
homicide when compared, state by state. Moreover, this finding is
reinforced by a 1976 Harvard study of a Massachusetts law providing a
mandatory minimum year in prison for anyone found possessing a handgun
without a government permit. It turns out that, during the year 1975,
this 1974 law did indeed considerably reduce the carrying of firearms
and the number of assaults with firearms. But, lo and behold! the
Harvard researchers found to their surprise that there was no
corresponding reduction in any type of violence. That is,

> As previous criminological studies have suggested, deprived of a
> handgun, a momentarily enraged citizen will resort to the far more
> deadly long gun. Deprived of all firearms, he will prove almost as
> deadly with knives, hammers, etc.

And clearly, “if reducing handgun ownership does not reduce homicide or
other violence, a handgun ban is just one more diversion of police
resources from real crime to victimless
crime.”^[10](#24-notes.html#chap06_fn10)^

Finally, Kates makes another intriguing point: that a society where
peaceful citizens are armed is far more likely to be one where Good
Samaritans who voluntarily go to the aid of victims of crime will
flourish. But take away people’s guns, and the public—disastrously for
the victims—will tend to leave the matter to the police. Before New York
State outlawed handguns, Good Samaritan instances were far more
widespread than now. And, in a recent survey of Good Samaritan cases no
less than 81 percent of the Samaritans were owners of guns. If we wish
to encourage a society where citizens come to the aid of neighbors in
distress, we must not strip them of the actual power to do something
about crime. Surely, it is the height of absurdity to disarm the
peaceful public and *then*, as is quite common, to denounce them for
“apathy” for failing to rush to the rescue of victims of criminal
assault.

# 7 EDUCATION [14-chap07.html#page145]

## PUBLIC AND COMPULSORY SCHOOLING [public-and-compulsory-schooling]

Until the last few years there were few institutions in America that
were held more sacred—especially by liberals—than the public school.
Devotion to the public school had seized even those early Americans—such
as Jeffersonians and Jacksonians—who were libertarian in most other
respects. In recent years the public school was supposed to be a crucial
ingredient of democracy, the fount of brotherhood, and the enemy of
elitism and separateness in American life. The public school was the
embodiment of the alleged right of every child to an education, and it
was upheld as a crucible of understanding and harmony between men of all
occupations and social classes who would rub elbows from an early age
with all their neighbors.

Going hand in hand with the spread of public education have been
*compulsory attendance laws*, which have forced all children up to a
high—and continually increasing—minimum age, to attend either a public
school or a private school certified as suitable by the state apparatus.
In contrast to earlier decades, when a relatively small proportion of
the population went to school in the higher grades, the entire mass of
the population has thus been coerced by the government into spending a
large portion of the most impressionable years of their lives in public
institutions. We could easily have analyzed compulsory attendance laws
in our chapter on involuntary servitude, for what institution is more
evidently a vast system of incarceration? In recent years, Paul Goodman
and other critics of education have trenchantly exposed the nation’s
public schools—and to a lesser extent their private appendages—as a vast
prison system for the nation’s youth, dragooning countless millions of
unwilling and unadaptable children into the schooling structure. The New
Left tactic of breaking into the high schools shouting “Jailbreak!” may
have been absurd and ineffective, but it certainly expressed a great
truth about the school system. For if we are to dragoon the entire youth
population into vast prisons in the guise of “education,” with teachers
and administrators serving as surrogate wardens and guards, why should
we not expect vast unhappiness, discontent, alienation, and rebellion on
the part of the nation’s youth? The only surprise should be that the
rebellion was so long in coming. But now it is increasingly acknowledged
that something is terribly wrong with America’s proudest institution;
that, especially in urban areas, the public schools have become
cesspools of crime, petty theft, and drug addiction, and that little or
no genuine education takes place amidst the warping of the minds and
souls of the children.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn1)^

Part of the reason for this tyranny over the nation’s youth is misplaced
altruism on the part of the educated middle class. The workers, or the
“lower classes,” they felt, should have the opportunity to enjoy the
schooling the middle classes value so highly. And if the parents or the
children of the masses should be so benighted as to balk at this
glorious opportunity set before them, well, then, a little coercion must
be applied—”for their own good,” of course.

A crucial fallacy of the middle-class school worshippers is confusion
between formal schooling and *education* in general. Education is a
lifelong process of learning, and learning takes place not only in
school, but in all areas of life. When the child plays, or listens to
parents or friends, or reads a newspaper, or works at a job, he or she
is becoming *educated.* Formal schooling is only a small part of the
educational process, and is really only suitable for formal subjects of
instruction, particularly in the more advanced and systematic subjects.
The elementary subjects, reading, writing, arithmetic and their
corollaries, can easily be learned at home and outside the school.

Furthermore, one of the great glories of mankind is its diversity, the
fact that each individual is unique, with unique abilities, interests,
and aptitudes. To coerce into formal schooling children who have neither
the ability nor the interest in this area is a criminal warping of the
soul and mind of the child. Paul Goodman has raised the cry that most
children would be far better off if they were allowed to work at an
early age, learn a trade, and begin to do that which they are most
suited for. America was built by citizens and leaders, many of whom
received little or no formal schooling, and the idea that one must have
a high-school diploma—or nowadays, an A.B. degree—before he can begin to
work and to live in the world is an absurdity of the current age.
Abolish compulsory attendance laws and give children their head, and we
will return to a nation of people far more productive, interested,
creative, and happy. Many thoughtful opponents of the New Left and the
youth rebellion have pointed out that much of the discontent of youth
and their divorce from reality is due to the ever-longer period in which
youth must remain at school, wrapped in a cocoon of dependence and
irresponsibility. Well and good, but what is the main reason for this
ever-lengthening cocoon? Clearly the whole system, and in particular the
compulsory attendance laws, which preach that everyone must go
perpetually to school—first to high school, now to college, and soon
perhaps for a Ph.D. degree. It is the compulsion toward mass schooling
that creates both the discontent and the ever-continuing shelter from
the “real world.” In no other nation and in no other age has this mania
for mass schooling so taken hold.

It is remarkable that the old libertarian right and the New Left, from
very different perspectives and using very different rhetoric, came to a
similar perception of the despotic nature of mass schooling. Thus,
Albert Jay Nock, the great individualist theorist of the 1920s and ’30s,
denounced the educational system for forcing the “ineducable” masses
into the schools out of a vain egalitarian belief in the equal
educability of every child. Instead of allowing those children with the
needed aptitude and ability to go to school, all children are being
coerced into schools for their own supposed good, and the result is a
distortion of the lives of those not suited for school and the wrecking
of proper schooling for the truly educable. Nock also perceptively
criticized the conservatives who attacked “progressive education” for
diluting educational standards by giving courses in automobile driving,
basket weaving, or choosing a dentist. Nock pointed out that if you
force a whole host of children who cannot absorb classical education
into school, then you *have* to shift education in the direction of
vocational training, suitable for the lowest common denominator. The
fatal flaw is not progressive education, but the drive toward universal
schooling to which progressivism was a makeshift
response.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn2)^

Such New Left critics as John McDermott and Paul Goodman charge, for
their part, that the middle class has been forcing working class
children, many of them with completely different values and aptitudes,
into a public school system designed to force these children into a
middle-class mould. It should be clear that whether one favors one class
or the other, one ideal of schooling or another, the substance of the
criticism is very much the same: that a whole mass of children are being
dragooned into an institution for which they have little interest or
aptitude.

Indeed, if we look into the history of the drive for public schooling
and compulsory attendance in this and other countries, we find at the
root not so much misguided altruism as a conscious scheme to coerce the
mass of the population into a mould desired by the Establishment.
Recalcitrant minorities were to be forced into a majority mould; all
citizens were to be inculcated in the civic virtues, notably and always
including obedience to the State apparatus. Indeed, if the mass of the
populace is to be educated in government schools, how could these
schools *not* become a mighty instrument for the inculcation of
obedience to the State authorities? Martin Luther, a leader in the first
modern drive for compulsory State education, phrased the plea typically
in his famous letter of 1524 to the rulers of Germany:

> Dear rulers... I maintain that the civil authorities are under
> obligation to compel the people to send their children to school. ...
> If the government can compel such citizens as are fit for military
> service to bear spear and rifle, to mount ramparts, and perform other
> martial duties in time of war, how much more has it a right to the
> people to send their children to school, because in this case we are
> warring with the devil, whose object it is secretly to exhaust our
> cities and principalities.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn3)^

Thus, for Luther, the State schools were to be an indispensable part of
the “war with the devil,” i.e., with Catholics, Jews, infidels, and
competing Protestant sects. A modern admirer of Luther and of compulsory
education was to remark that

> the permanent and positive value of Luther’s pronouncement of 1524
> lies... in the hallowed associations which it established for
> Protestant Germany between the national religion and the educational
> duties of the individual and the state. Thus, doubtless, was created
> that healthy public opinion which rendered the principle of compulsory
> school attendance easy of acceptance in Prussia at a much earlier date
> than in England.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn4)^

The other great Protestant founder, John Calvin, was no less zealous in
promoting mass public schooling, and for similar reasons. It is
therefore not surprising that the earliest compulsory schooling in
America was established by the Calvinist Puritans in Massachusetts Bay,
those men who were so eager to plant an absolutist Calvinist theocracy
in the New World. In June 1642, only a year after the Massachusetts Bay
colony enacted its first set of laws, the colony established the first
system of compulsory education in the English-speaking world. The law
declared:

> For as much as the good education of children is of singular behoof
> and benefit to any commonwealth, and whereas many parents and masters
> are too indulgent and negligent of their duty of that kind, it is
> ordered that the selectmen of every town... shall have a vigilant eye
> over their neighbors, to see first that none of them shall suffer so
> much barbarism in any of their families, as not to endeavor to teach,
> by themselves or others, their children and
> apprentices.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn5)^

Five years later, Massachusetts Bay followed up this law with the
establishment of public schools.

Thus, from the beginning of American history, the desire to mould,
instruct, and render obedient the mass of the population was the major
impetus behind the drive toward public schooling. In colonial days,
public schooling was used as a device to suppress religious dissent, as
well as to imbue unruly servants with the virtues of obedience to the
State. It is typical, for example, that in the course of their
suppression of the Quakers, Massachusetts and Connecticut forbade that
despised sect from establishing their own schools. And Connecticut, in a
vain attempt to suppress the “New Light” movement, in 1742 forbade that
sect from establishing any of their own schools. Otherwise, the
Connecticut authorities reasoned, the New Lights “may tend to train
youth in ill principles and practices, and introduce such disorders as
may be of fatal consequences to the public peace and weal of this
colony.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn6)^ It is hardly a coincidence that
the only truly free colony in New England—Rhode Island—was also the one
colony in the area devoid of public schooling.

The motivation for public and compulsory schooling after Independence
scarcely differed in essentials. Thus, Archibald D. Murphey, the father
of the public school system in North Carolina, called for such schools
as follows:

> all the children will be taught in them. ... In these schools the
> precepts of morality and religion should be inculcated, and habits of
> subordination and obedience be formed. ... Their parents know not how
> to instruct them. ... The state, in the warmth of her affection and
> solicitude for their welfare, must take charge of those children, and
> place them in school where their minds can be enlightened and their
> hearts can be trained to virtue.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn7)^

One of the most common uses of compulsory public schooling has been to
oppress and cripple national ethnic and linguistic minorities or
colonized peoples—to force them to abandon their own language and
culture on behalf of the language and culture of the ruling groups. The
English in Ireland and Quebec, and nations throughout Central and
Eastern Europe and in Asia—all dragooned their national minorities into
the public schools run by their masters. One of the most potent stimuli
for discontent and rebellion by these oppressed peoples was the desire
to rescue their language and heritage from the weapon of public schools
wielded by their oppressors. Thus, the laissez-faire liberal Ludwig von
Mises has written that, in linguistically mixed countries,

> continued adherence to a policy of compulsory education is utterly
> incompatible with efforts to establish lasting peace. The question of
> which language is to be made the basis of instruction assumes crucial
> importance. A decision one way or the other can, over the years,
> determine the nationality of a whole area. The school can alienate
> children from the nationality to which their parents belong and can be
> used as a means of oppressing whole nationalities. Whoever controls
> the schools has the power to injure other nationalities and to benefit
> his own.

Furthermore, Mises points out, the coercion inherent in rule by one
nationality makes it impossible to solve the problem by formally
allowing each parent to send his child to a school using a language of
his own nationality.

> It is often not possible for an individual—out of regard for his means
> of livelihood—to declare himself openly for one or another
> nationality. Under a system of interventionism, it could cost him the
> patronage of customers belonging to other nationalities or a job with
> an entrepreneur of a different nationality. ... If one leaves to the
> parents the choice of the school to which they wish to send their
> children, then one exposes them to every conceivable form of political
> coercion. In all areas of mixed nationality, the school is a political
> prize of the highest importance. It cannot be deprived of its
> political character so long as it remains a public and compulsory
> institution. There is, in fact, only *one* solution: the state, the
> government, the laws must not in any way concern themselves with
> schooling or education. Public funds must not be used for such
> purposes. The rearing and instruction of youth must be left entirely
> to parents and to private associations and
> institutions.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn8)^

In fact, one of the major motivations of the legion of
mid-nineteenth-century American “educational reformers” who established
the modern public school system was precisely to use it to cripple the
cultural and linguistic life of the waves of immigrants into America,
and to mould them, as educational reformer Samuel Lewis stated, into
“one people.” It was the desire of the Anglo-Saxon majority to tame,
channel, and restructure the immigrants, and in particular to smash the
parochial school system of the Catholics, that formed the major impetus
for educational “reform.” The New Left critics who perceive the role of
the public schools of today in crippling and moulding the minds of
ghetto children are only grasping the current embodiment of a
long-cherished goal held by the public school Establishment—by the
Horace Manns and the Henry Barnards and the Calvin Stowes. It was Mann
and Barnard, for example, who urged the use of the schools for
indoctrination against the “mobocracy” of the Jacksonian movement. And
it was Stowe, author of an admiring tract on the Prussian compulsory
school system originally inspired by Martin Luther, who wrote of the
schools in unmistakably Lutheran and military terms:

> If a regard to the public safety makes it right for a government to
> compel the citizens to do military duty when the country is invaded,
> the same reason authorizes the government to compel them to provide
> for the education of their children. ... A man has no more right to
> endanger the state by throwing upon it a family of ignorant and
> vicious children, than he has to give admission to the spies of an
> invading army.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn9)^

Forty years later, Newton Bateman, a leading educator, spoke of the
State’s “right of eminent domain” over the “minds and souls and bodies”
of the nation’s children: Education, he asserted, “cannot be left to the
caprices and contingencies of
individuals.”^[10](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn10)^

The most ambitious attempt by the public school partisans to maximize
their control over the nation’s children came in Oregon during the early
1920s. The state of Oregon, unhappy even with allowing private schools
certified by the state, passed a law on November 7, 1922, outlawing
private schools and compelling all children to attend public school.
Here was the culmination of the educationists’ dream. At last, all
children were to be forced into the “democratizing” mould of uniform
education by the state authorities. The law, happily, was declared
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1925
(*Pierce v. Society of Sisters*, June 1, 1925). The Supreme Court
declared that “the child is not the mere creature of the State,” and
asserted that the Oregon law clashed with the “fundamental theory of
liberty upon which all governments in this Union repose.” The public
school fanatics never tried to go that far again. But it is instructive
to realize what the forces were that attempted to outlaw all competing
private education in the state of Oregon. For the spearheads of the law
were *not,* as we might expect, liberal or progressive educators or
intellectuals; the spearhead was the Ku Klux Klan, then strong in the
northern states, which was eager to crush the Catholic parochial school
system, and to force all Catholic and immigrant children into the
neo-Protestantizing and “Americanizing” force of the public school. The
Klan, it is interesting to note, opined that such a law was necessary
for the “preservation of free institutions.” It is well to ponder that
the much-vaunted “progressive” and “democratic” public school system had
its most ardent supporters in the most bigoted byways of American life,
among people anxious to stamp out diversity and variety in
America.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn11)^

## UNIFORMITY OR DIVERSITY? [uniformity-or-diversity]

While current educationists do not go as far as the Ku Klux Klan, it is
important to realize that the very *nature* of the public school
*requires* the imposition of uniformity and the stamping out of
diversity and individuality in education.

For it is in the nature of any governmental bureaucracy to live by a set
of rules, and to impose those rules in a uniform and heavy-handed
manner. If it did not do so, and the bureaucrat were to decide
individual cases ad hoc, he would then be accused, and properly so, of
not treating each taxpayer and citizen in an equal and uniform manner.
He would be accused of discrimination and of fostering special
privilege. Furthermore, it is administratively more convenient for the
bureaucrat to establish uniform rules throughout his jurisdiction. In
contrast to the private, profit-making business, the government
bureaucrat is neither interested in efficiency nor in serving his
customers to the best of his ability. Having no need to make profits and
sheltered from the possibility of suffering losses, the bureaucrat can
and does disregard the desires and demands of his consumer-customers.
His major interest is in “not making waves,” and this he accomplishes by
even-handedly applying a uniform set of rules, regardless of how
inapplicable they may be in any given case.

The public school bureaucrat, for his part, is faced with a host of
crucial and controversial decisions in deciding on the pattern of formal
schooling in his area. He must decide: Should schooling be—traditional
or progressive? free enterprise or socialistic? competitive or
egalitarian? liberal arts or vocational? segregated or integrated? sex
education or not? religious or secular? or various shades between these
poles. The point is that *whatever* he decides, and even if he decides
according to the wishes of the majority of the public, there will always
be a substantial number of parents and children who will be totally
deprived of the kind of education they desire. If the decision is for
traditional discipline in the schools, then the more progressive-minded
parents lose out, and vice versa; and the same is true for all the other
critical decisions. The more that education becomes public, the more
will parents and children be deprived of the education they feel they
need. The more that education becomes public, the more will heavy-handed
uniformity stamp out the needs and desires of individuals and
minorities.

Consequently, the greater the sphere of public as opposed to private
education, the greater the scope and intensity of conflict in social
life. For if one agency is going to make the decision: sex education or
no, traditional or progressive, integrated or segregated, etc., then it
becomes particularly important to gain control of the government and to
prevent one’s adversaries from taking power themselves. Hence, in
education as well as in all other activities, the more that government
decisions replace private decision-making, the more various groups will
be at each others’ throats in a desperate race to see to it that the one
and only decision in each vital area goes its own way.

Contrast the deprivation and intense social conflict inherent in
government decision-making with the state of affairs on the free market.
If education were strictly private, then each and every group of parents
could and would patronize its own kind of school. A host of diverse
schools would spring up to meet the varied structure of educational
demands by parents and children. Some schools would be traditional,
others progressive. Schools would range through the full
traditional-progressive scale; some schools would experiment with
egalitarian and gradeless education, others would stress the rigorous
learning of subjects and competitive grading; some schools would be
secular, others would emphasize various religious creeds; some schools
would be libertarian and stress the virtues of free enterprise, others
would preach various kinds of socialism.

Let us consider, for example, the structure of the magazine or book
publishing industry today, remembering too that magazines and books are
themselves an extremely important form of education. The magazine
market, being roughly free, contains all manner of magazines to suit a
wide variety of tastes and demands by consumers: there are nationwide,
all-purpose magazines; there are liberal, conservative, and all manner
of ideological journals; there are specialized scholarly publications;
and there are a myriad of magazines devoted to special interests and
hobbies like bridge, chess, hi-fi, etc. A similar structure appears in
the free book market: there are wide-circulation books, books appealing
to specialized markets, books of all ideological persuasions. Abolish
public schools, and the free, varied, and diverse magazine and book
markets would be paralleled by a similar kind of “school market.” In
contrast, if there were only one magazine for each city or state, think
of the battles and conflicts that would rage: Should the magazine be
conservative, liberal, or socialist; how much space should it devote to
fiction or bridge, etc.? The pressures and conflicts would be intense,
and no resolution would be satisfactory, for *any* decision would
deprive countless numbers of people of what they want and require. What
the libertarian is calling for, then, is not as *outré* as it might at
first appear; what he is calling for is a school system as free and
varied as most other educational media are today.

To focus again on other educational media, what then would we think of a
proposal for the government, federal or state, to use the taxpayers
money to set up a nationwide chain of public magazines or newspapers,
and then to compel all people, or all children, to read them? Further,
what would we think of the government outlawing all other newspapers and
magazines, or at the very least outlawing all newspapers or magazines
that do not come up to certain “standards” of what a government
commission thinks children ought to read? Such a proposal would surely
be regarded with horror throughout the country, yet this is precisely
the sort of regime that government has established in the schools. A
compulsory public press would rightly be considered an invasion of the
basic freedom of the press; is not scholastic freedom at least as
important as press freedom? Aren’t both vital media for public
information and education, for free inquiry and search for the truth? In
fact, the suppression of free schooling should be regarded with even
greater horror than the suppression of a free press, since here the
tender and unformed minds of children are more directly involved.

It is intriguing that at least some public school advocates have
recognized the analogy between schooling and the press and have pursued
their logic to the latter area. Thus, prominent in Boston politics in
the 1780s and 1790s was the arch-Federalist “Essex Junto,” a group of
leading merchants and lawyers originally hailing from Essex County,
Massachusetts. The Essexmen were particularly anxious for an extensive
public school system in order to have the youth “taught the proper
subordination.” Essexman Stephen Higginson frankly declared that “the
people must be taught to confide in and revere their rulers.” And seeing
with firm consistency that newspapers were as important a form of
education as formal schooling, another leading Essex merchant and
theoretician, Jonathan Jackson, denounced the free press for being
necessarily subservient to its readership, and advocated a state-owned
newspaper that could be independent of its readers and therefore
inculcate the proper virtues into the
citizenry.^[12](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn12)^

Professor E.G. West has also offered an instructive analogy between the
provision of schooling and of food, surely an industry of at least an
equal importance for children as well as adults. West writes:

> Protection of a child against starvation or malnutrition is presumably
> just as important as protection against ignorance. It is difficult to
> envisage, however, that any government, in its anxiety to see that
> children have minimum standards of food and clothing, would pass laws
> for compulsory and universal eating, or that it should entertain
> measures which lead to increased taxes or rates in order to provide
> children’s food, “free” at local authority kitchens or shops. It is
> still more difficult to imagine that most people would unquestioningly
> accept this system, especially where it had developed to the stage
> that for “administrative reasons” parents were allocated to those
> shops which happened to be nearest their homes. ... Yet strange as
> such hypothetical measures may appear when applied to the provision of
> food and clothing they are nevertheless typical of... state
> education.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn13)^

Several libertarian thinkers, from “left-” and “right”-wing ends of the
libertarian spectrum, have delivered trenchant critiques of the
totalitarian nature of compulsory public schooling. Thus,
left-libertarian British critic Herbert Read:

> Mankind is naturally differentiated into many types, and to press all
> these types into the same mold must inevitably lead to distortions and
> repressions. Schools should be of many kinds, following different
> methods and catering for different dispositions. It might be argued
> that even a totalitarian state must recognize this principle but the
> truth is that differentiation is an organic process, the spontaneous
> and roving associations of individuals for particular purposes. ...
> The whole structure of education as the natural process we have
> envisaged, falls to pieces if we attempt to make that structure...
> artificial.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn14)^

And the great late-nineteenth-century individualist English philosopher
Herbert Spencer asked:

> For what is meant by saying that a government ought to educate the
> people? Why should they be educated? What is the education for?
> Clearly to fit the people for social life—to make them good citizens?
> And who is to say what are good citizens? The government: there is no
> other judge. And who is to say how these good citizens may be made?
> The government: there is no other judge. Hence the proposition is
> convertible into this—a government ought to mold children into good
> citizens. ... It must first form for itself a definite conception of a
> pattern citizen; and having done this, must elaborate such system of
> discipline as seems best calculated to produce citizens after that
> pattern. This system of discipline it is bound to enforce to the
> uttermost. For if it does otherwise, it allows men to become different
> from what in its judgment they should become, and therefore fails in
> that duty it is charged to fulfill.^[15](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn15)^

And the twentieth-century American individualist writer Isabel Paterson
declared:

> Educational texts are necessarily selective, in subject matter,
> language, and point of view. Where teaching is conducted by private
> schools, there will be a considerable variation in different schools;
> the parents must judge what they want their children taught, by the
> curriculum offered. ... Nowhere will there be any inducement to teach
> the “supremacy of the state as a compulsory philosophy.” But every
> politically controlled educational system will inculcate the doctrine
> of state supremacy sooner or later, whether as the divine right of
> kings, or the “will of the people” in “democracy.” Once that doctrine
> has been accepted, it becomes an almost superhuman task to break the
> stranglehold of the political power over the life of the citizen. It
> has had his body, property, and mind in its clutches from infancy. An
> octopus would sooner release its prey.
>
> A tax-supported, compulsory educational system is the complete model
> of the totalitarian state.^[16](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn16)^

As E.C. West indicated, bureaucratic convenience has invariably led the
states to prescribe geographical public school districts, to place one
school in each district, and then to force each public school child to
attend school in the district closest to his residence. While in a free
private school market most children would undoubtedly attend schools
near their homes, the present system compels a monopoly of one school
per district, and thereby coerces uniformity throughout each area.
Children who, for whatever reason, would prefer to attend a school in
another district are prohibited from doing so. The result is enforced
geographic homogeneity, and it also means that the character of each
school is completely dependent on its residential neighborhood. It is
then inevitable that public schools, instead of being totally uniform,
will be uniform *within* each district, and the composition of pupils,
the financing of each school, and the quality of education will come to
depend upon the values, the wealth, and the tax base, of each
geographical area. The fact that wealthy school districts will have
costlier and higher-quality teaching, higher teaching salaries, and
better working conditions than the poorer districts, then becomes
inevitable. Teachers will regard the better schools as the superior
teaching posts, and the better teachers will gravitate to the better
school districts, while the poorer ones must remain in the lower-income
areas. Hence, the operation of district public schools inevitably
results in the negation of the very egalitarian goal which is supposed
to be a major aim of the public school system in the first place.

Moreover, if the residential areas are racially segregated, as they
often tend to be, the result of a compulsory geographical monopoly is
the compulsory racial segregation of the public schools. Those parents
who prefer integrated schooling have to come up against the geographical
monopoly system. Furthermore, just as some wag has said that nowadays
“Whatever isn’t prohibited is compulsory,” the recent tendency of the
public school bureaucrats has not been to institute voluntary busing of
children to widen parental discretion, but to swing in the opposite
direction and institute compulsory busing and compulsory racial
integration of the schools—often resulting in a grotesque transfer of
children far from their homes. Once again, the typical government
pattern: either compulsory segregation or compulsory integration. The
voluntary way—leaving the decisions up to the individual parents
involved—cuts across the grain of any State bureaucracy.

It is curious that recent movements for local parental control of public
education have sometimes been called “extreme right-wing” and at other
times “extreme left-wing,” when the libertarian motivation has been
precisely the same in either case. Thus, when parents have opposed the
compulsory busing of their children to distant schools, the educational
Establishment has condemned these movements as “bigoted” and
“right-wing.” But when, similarly, Negro parents—as in the case of Ocean
Hill-Brownsville in New York City—have demanded local parental control
of the school system, this drive in its turn has been condemned as
“extreme left-wing” and “nihilistic.” The most curious part of the
affair is that the parents in both cases have failed to recognize their
common desire for local parental control, and have themselves condemned
the “bigots” or “militants” in the other group. Tragically, neither the
local white nor black groups have recognized their common cause against
the educational Establishment: against dictatorial control of their
children’s education by an educational bureaucracy which is trying to
ram down their throats a form of schooling which *it* believes must be
imposed upon the recalcitrant masses. One crucial task of libertarians
is to highlight the common cause of all groups of parents against the
State’s educational tyranny. Of course, it must also be pointed out that
parents can *never* get the State off their educational backs until the
public school system is totally abolished and schooling becomes free
once more.

The geographical nature of the public school system has also led to a
coerced pattern of residential segregation, in income and consequently
in race, throughout the country and particularly in the suburbs. As
everyone knows, the United States since World War II has seen an
expansion of population, not in the inner central cities, but in the
surrounding suburban areas. As new and younger families have moved to
the suburbs, by far the largest and growing burden of local budgets has
been to pay for the public schools, which have to accommodate a young
population with a relatively high proportion of children per capita.
These schools invariably have been financed from growing property
taxation, which largely falls on the suburban residences. This means
that the wealthier the suburban family, and the more expensive its home,
the greater will be its tax contribution for the local school. Hence, as
the burden of school taxes increases steadily, the suburbanites try
desperately to encourage an inflow of wealthy residents and expensive
homes, and *to discourage* an inflow of poorer citizens. There is, in
short, a break-even point of the price of a house beyond which a new
family in a new house will more than pay for its children’s education in
its property taxes. Families in homes below that cost level will not pay
enough in property taxes to finance their children’s education and hence
will throw a greater tax burden on the existing population of the
suburb. Realizing this, suburbs have generally adopted rigorous zoning
laws which prohibit the erection of housing below a minimum cost
level—and thereby freeze out any inflow of poorer citizens. Since the
proportion of Negro poor is far greater than white poor, this
effectively also bars Negroes from joining the move to the suburbs. And
since in recent years there has been an increasing shift of jobs and
industry from the central city to the suburbs as well, the result is an
increasing pressure of unemployment on the Negroes—a pressure which is
bound to intensify as the job shift accelerates. The abolition of the
public schools, and therefore of the school burden—property tax linkage,
would go a long way toward removing zoning restrictions and ending the
suburb as an upper middle-class-white preserve.

## BURDENS AND SUBSIDIES [burdens-and-subsidies]

The very existence of the public school system, furthermore, involves a
complex network of coerced levies and subsidies, all of which are
difficult to justify on any ethical grounds whatever. In the first
place, public schools force those parents who wish to send their
children to private schools to shoulder a double burden: they are
coerced into subsidizing public school children, and they also have to
pay for their own children’s education. Only the evident breakdown of
public education in the large cities has maintained a flourishing
private school system there; in higher education, where the breakdown
has not been as stark, private colleges are rapidly being put out of
business by the competition from tax-subsidized free tuition and
tax-financed higher salaries. Similarly, since public schools must
constitutionally be secular, this means that religious parents must be
forced to subsidize the secular public schools. While “separation of
church and State” is a noble principle—and a subset of the libertarian
principle of separating *everything* from the State—it is surely going
too far in the other direction to force the religious to subsidize the
nonreligious through State coercion.

The existence of the public school also means that unmarried and
childless couples are coerced into subsidizing families with children.
What is the ethical principle here? And now that population growth is no
longer fashionable, consider the anomaly of liberal antipopulationists
advocating a public school system that not only subsidizes families with
children, but subsidizes them in *proportion to the number of children*
they have. We need not subscribe to the full dimensions of the current
antipopulation hysteria to question the wisdom of deliberately
subsidizing the number of children per family by government action. This
means, too, that poor single people and poor childless couples are
forced to subsidize wealthy families with children. Does this make any
ethical sense at all?

In recent years, the public school forces have promulgated the doctrine
that “Every child has a right to an education,” and therefore that the
taxpayers should be coerced into granting that right. But this concept
totally misconstrues the concept of “right.” A “right,” philosophically,
must be something embedded in the nature of man and reality, something
that can be preserved and maintained at any time and in any age. The
“right” of self-ownership, of defending one’s life and property, is
clearly that sort of right: it can apply to Neanderthal cavemen, in
modern Calcutta, or in the contemporary United States. Such a right is
independent of time or place. But a “right to a job” or to “three meals
a day” or to “twelve years of schooling” cannot be so guaranteed.
Suppose that such things *cannot* exist, as was true in Neanderthal days
or in modern Calcutta? To speak of a “right” as something which can only
be fulfilled in modern industrial conditions is not to speak of a human,
natural right at all. Furthermore, the libertarian “right” of
self-ownership does not require the coercion of one set of people to
provide such a “right” for another set. *Every* man can enjoy the right
of self-ownership, without special coercion upon anyone. But in the case
of a “right” to schooling, this can only be provided if other people are
coerced into fulfilling it. The “right” to schooling, to a job, three
meals, etc., is then not embedded in the nature of man, but requires for
its fulfillment the existence of a group of exploited people who are
coerced into providing such a “right.”

Furthermore the entire concept of a “right to education” should always
be placed in the context that formal schooling is only a small fraction
of any person’s education in life. If every child really has a “right”
to education, then why not a “right” to reading newspapers and
magazines, and then why should not the government tax everyone to
provide free public magazines for everyone who wishes to obtain them.

Professor Milton Friedman, an economist at the University of Chicago,
has performed an important service in separating out money sums from
various aspects of government subsidy, in education as well as in other
areas. While Friedman unfortunately accepts the view that every child
should have his schooling provided by the taxpayers, he points out the
*non sequitur* in using this as an argument for public schools: It is
quite feasible for the taxpayer to subsidize every child’s education
without having any public schools
whatsoever!^[17](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn17)^ In Friedman’s now famous
“voucher plan,” the government would give to every parent a voucher
entitling him to pay a certain amount of tuition for each child, in *any
school* of the parent’s choice. The voucher plan would continue the
tax-financed provision of education for every child, yet enable the
abolition of the vast monopolistic, inefficient, dictatorial public
school bureaucracy. The parent could then send his child to any sort of
private school that he wished, and the range of choice for every parent
and child would then be maximized. The child could then go to any type
of school—progressive or traditional, religious or secular, free
enterprise or socialistic—the parent desired. The monetary subsidy would
then be totally separated from the government’s actual provision of
schooling through a public school system.

While the Friedman plan would be a great improvement over the present
system in permitting a wider range of parental choice and enabling the
abolition of the public school system, the libertarian finds many grave
problems yet remaining. In the first place, the immorality of coerced
subsidy for schooling would still continue in force. Secondly, it is
inevitable that the power to subsidize brings with it the power to
regulate and control: The government is not about to hand out vouchers
for *any* kind of schooling whatever. Clearly, then, the government
would only pay vouchers for private schools *certified* as fitting and
proper by the State, which means detailed control of the private schools
by the government—control over their curriculum, methods, form of
financing, etc. The power of the State over private schools, through its
power to certify or not to certify for vouchers, will be even greater
than it is now.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn18)^

Since the Oregon case, the public school advocates have never gone so
far as to abolish private schools, but these schools remain regulated
and confined in numerous ways. Each state, for example, provides that
every child must be educated in schools it certifies, which again
coerces the schools into a curricular mould desired by the government.
In order to “qualify” as certified private schools, all sorts of
pointless and costly regulations have to be fulfilled, by the school as
well as by the teacher, who must often take a host of meaningless
“education” courses in order to be deemed qualified to teach. Many fine
private schools are now operating technically “illegally,” because they
refuse to conform to the often stultifying government requirements.
Perhaps the gravest injustice is that, in most states, parents are
prohibited from teaching their children themselves, since the state will
not agree that they constitute a proper “school.” There are a vast
number of parents who are more than qualified to teach their children
themselves, particularly the elementary grades. Furthermore, they are
more qualified than any outside party to judge the abilities and the
required pacing of each child, and to gear education to the individual
needs and abilities of each child. No formal school, confined to uniform
classrooms, can perform that sort of service.

“Free” schools, whether current public schools or future vouchered
schools, are of course not *really* free; someone, that is, the
taxpayers, must pay for the educational services involved. But with
service severed from payment, there tends to be an oversupply of
children into the schools (apart from the compulsory attendance laws
which have the same effect), and a lack of interest by the child in the
educational service for which his family does not have to pay. As a
result, a large number of children unsuitable for or uninterested in
school who would be better off either at home or working, are dragooned
into going to school and into staying there far longer than they should.
The resulting mania for mass schooling has led to a mass of discontented
and imprisoned children along with the general view that everyone *has*
to finish high school (or even college) to be worthy of being employed.
Adding to this pressure has been the hysterical growth of “antidropout”
propaganda in the mass media. Part of this development is the fault of
business, for employers are quite happy to have their labor force
trained, not by the employers or on the job, but at the expense of the
hapless taxpayer. How much of the burgeoning of mass public schooling is
a means by which employers foist the cost of training their workers upon
the taxpayers at large?

One would expect that this training, being without cost to employers,
will be highly expensive, inefficient, and far too lengthy. There is in
fact increasing evidence that a vast amount of current schooling is not
needed for productive employment. As Arthur Stinchcombe asks:

> Is there anything that a high school can teach which employers of
> manual labor would be willing to pay for, if it were learned well? In
> general, the answer is no. Neither physical abilities nor reliability,
> the two main variables of interest in employers of manual labor, are
> much influenced by schooling. Employers concerned with securing
> reliable workers may require high school diplomas as evidence of good
> discipline. Otherwise they can train workers better and cheaper than a
> high school can, on the job.^[19](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn19)^

And, as Professor Banfield points out, most job skills are learned on
the job anyway.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn20)^

The relative uselessness of the public school system for training manual
labor is demonstrated by the fascinating work of MIND, a private
educational service now operated by the Corn Products Refining Company
of Greenwich, Connecticut. MIND deliberately chose high-school dropouts
who were unskilled for manual jobs, and in a few short weeks, using
intensive training and teaching machines, was able to teach these
dropouts basic skills and typing, and place them in corporate jobs. Ten
years of public schooling had taught these youngsters less than a few
weeks of private, job-oriented training! Allowing youngsters to drop out
from enforced dependency into becoming independent and self-supporting
could only have immeasurable benefits for the youngsters themselves and
for the rest of society.

There is considerable evidence linking compulsory attendance laws with
the growing problem of juvenile delinquency, particularly in frustrated
older children. Thus, Stinchcombe found that rebellious and delinquent
behavior is “largely a reaction to the school itself”; and the British
Crowther Committee found that when in 1947 the minimum school-leaving
age was raised by the government from fourteen to fifteen, there was an
immediate and sharp increase in the delinquencies committed by the newly
incarcerated fourteen-year-olds.^[21](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn21)^

Part of the blame for compulsory attendance and mass public schooling
must also be laid at the door of the labor unions which, in order to
reduce competition from young, adolescent workers, try to force the
youth out of the labor market and into educational institutions for as
long a time as possible. Thus, both labor unions and employers exert
powerful pressure for compulsory schooling and therefore for the
nonemployment of most of the nation’s youth.

## HIGHER EDUCATION [higher-education]

With the exception of the effects of compulsory attendance laws, the
same strictures we have levelled against public schools can also be
directed against public higher education, with one noteworthy addition.
There is increasing evidence that, certainly in the case of public
higher education, the coerced subsidy is largely in the direction of
forcing poorer citizens to subsidize the education of the wealthier!
There are three basic reasons: the tax structure for schools is *not*
particularly “progressive,” i.e., does not tax the wealthier in greater
proportion; the kids going to college generally have wealthier parents
than the kids who do not; and the kids going to college will, as a
result, acquire a higher lifetime working income than those who do not
go. Hence a net redistribution of income from the poorer to the richer
via the public college! Where is the ethical justification here?

Professors Weisbrod and Hansen have already demonstrated this
redistribution effect in their studies of public higher education in
Wisconsin and California. They found, for example, that the average
family income of Wisconsinites without children in Wisconsin state
universities was \$6,500 in 1964–1965, while the average family income
of families *with* children at the University of Wisconsin was \$9,700.
In California the respective figures were \$7,900 and \$12,000, and the
subsidy disparity was even greater because the tax structure was much
less “progressive” in the latter state. Douglas Windham found a similar
redistribution effect from poorer to wealthier in the state of Florida.
Hansen and Weisbrod concluded, from their California study:

> on the whole, the effect of these subsidies is to promote greater
> rather than less inequality among people of various social and
> economic backgrounds by making available substantial subsidies that
> lower income families are either not eligible for or cannot make use
> of because of other conditions and constraints associated with their
> income position.
>
> What we have found true in California—an exceedingly unequal
> distribution of subsidies provided through public higher
> education—quite probably is even more true for other states. No state
> has such an extensive system of local Junior Colleges as does
> California, and for this reason, no state has such a large percentage
> of its high school graduates going on to public higher education. As a
> result we can be rather confident that California has a smaller
> percentage of its young people receiving a zero subsidy than do other
> states.^[22](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn22)^

Furthermore, the states, in addition to putting private colleges into
financial jeopardy by their unfair, tax-subsidized competition, enforce
strict controls on private higher education through various regulations.
Thus, in New York State, no one can establish any institution called a
“college” or “university” unless he posts a \$500,000 bond with the
state of New York. Clearly, this severely discriminates against small,
poorer educational institutions, and effectively keeps them out of
higher education. Also, the regional associations of colleges, through
their power of “accreditation,” can effectively put *any* college that
does not conform to Establishment canons of curriculum or financing out
of business. For example, these associations strictly refuse to accredit
any college, no matter how excellent its instruction, that is
proprietary or profit making, rather than trustee-governed. Since
proprietary colleges, having a far greater incentive to be efficient and
to serve the consumer, will tend to be more successful financially, this
discrimination places another heavy economic burden on private higher
education. In recent years, the successful Marjorie Webster Junior
College in Washington, D.C., was almost put out of business by the
refusal of its regional association to grant it accreditation. While one
might say that the regional associations are private and not public,
they work hand in hand with the federal government, which, for example,
refuses to provide the usual scholarships or GI benefits to unaccredited
colleges.^[23](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn23)^

Governmental discrimination against proprietary colleges (and other
institutions, as well) does not stop at accreditation and scholarships.
The entire income tax structure discriminates against them even more
severely. By exempting trustee-run organizations from income taxes and
by levying heavy taxes on profit-making institutions, the federal and
state governments cripple and repress what could be the most efficient
and solvent form of private education. The libertarian solution to this
inequity, of course, is *not* to place equal burdens on the trustee
colleges, but to remove the tax burdens on the proprietary schools. The
libertarian ethic is not to impose equal slavery on everyone, but to
arrive at equal freedom.

Trustee governance is, in general, a poor way to run any institution. In
the first place, in contrast to profit-making firms, partnerships, or
corporations, the trustee-run firm is not fully owned by *anyone.* The
trustees *cannot* make profits from successful operation of the
organization, so there is no incentive to be efficient, or to serve the
firm’s customers properly. As long as the college or other organization
does not suffer excessive deficits it can peg along at a low level of
performance. Since the trustees cannot make profits by bettering their
service to customers, they tend to be lax in their operations.
Furthermore, they are hobbled in financial efficiency by the terms of
their charters; for example, the trustees of a college are forbidden
from saving their institution by converting part of the campus into a
commercial enterprise—say a profit-making parking lot.

The short-changing of the customers is aggravated in the case of current
trustee-colleges, where the students pay only a small fraction of the
cost of their education, the major part being financed by subsidy or
endowment. The usual market situation, where the producers sell the
product and the consumers pay the full amount, is gone, and the
disjunction between service and payment leads to an unsatisfactory state
of affairs for everyone. The consumers, for example, feel that the
managers are calling the tune. In contrast, as one libertarian remarked
at the height of the student riots of the late 1960s, “nobody sits in at
Berlitz.” Furthermore, the fact that the “consumers” are really the
governments, foundations, or alumni who pay the largest share of the
bill, means that higher education inevitably gets skewed in the
direction of their demands rather than toward the education of students.
As Professors Buchanan and Devletoglou state:

> The interposition of the government between the universities and their
> student-consumers has created a situation in which universities cannot
> meet demand and tap directly resources for satisfying student-consumer
> preferences. In order to get resources, universities have to compete
> with other tax-financed activities (armed forces, lower schools,
> welfare programs, and so forth). In the process, student-consumer
> demand is neglected, and the resulting student unrest provides the
> ingredients for the chaos we observe. ... The mounting dependence on
> governmental financial support, as this has been translated into the
> institution of free tuition, may itself be one significant source of
> current unrest.^[24](#24-notes.html#chap07_fn24)^

The libertarian prescription for our educational mess can, then, be
summed up simply: Get the government out of the educational process. The
government has attempted to indoctrinate and mould the nation’s youth
through the public school system, and to mould the future leaders
through State operation and control of higher education. Abolition of
compulsory attendance laws would end the schools’ role as prison
custodians of the nation’s youth, and would free all those better off
outside the schools for independence and for productive work. The
abolition of the public schools would end the crippling property tax
burden and provide a vast range of education to satisfy all the freely
exercised needs and demands of our diverse and varied population. The
abolition of government schooling would end the unjust coerced subsidy
granted to large families, and, often, toward the upper classes and
against the poor. The miasma of government, of moulding the youth of
America in the direction desired by the State, would be replaced by
freely chosen and voluntary actions—in short, by a genuine and truly
free education, both in and out of formal schools.

# 8 WELFARE AND THE WELFARE STATE [15-chap08.html#page175]

## WHY THE WELFARE CRISIS? [why-the-welfare-crisis]

Almost everyone, regardless of ideology, agrees that there is something
terribly wrong with the accelerating, runaway welfare system in the
United States, a system in which an ever-increasing proportion of the
population lives as idle, compulsory claimants on the production of the
rest of society. A few figures and comparisons will sketch in some of
the dimensions of this galloping problem. In 1934, in the middle of the
greatest depression in American history, at a nadir of our economic
life, total government social welfare expenditures were \$5.8 billion,
of which direct welfare payments (“public aid”) amounted to \$2.5
billion. In 1976, after four decades of the greatest boom in American
history, at a time when we had reached the status of having the highest
standard of living in the history of the world with a relatively low
level of unemployment, government social welfare expenditures totalled
\$331.4 billion, of which direct welfare amounted to \$48.9 billion. In
short, total social welfare spending rose by the enormous sum of 5,614
percent in these four decades, and direct welfare aid increased by 1,856
percent. Or, put another way, social welfare spending increased by an
average of 133.7 percent per year during this 1934–1976 period, while
direct welfare aid increased by 44.2 percent per annum.

If we concentrate further on direct welfare, we find that spending
stayed about the same from 1934 to 1950, and then took off into the
stratosphere along with the post-World War II boom. In the years from
1950 to 1976, in fact, welfare aid increased by the huge sum of 84.4
percent per year.

Now some of these enormous increases can be accounted for by inflation,
which diluted the value and purchasing power of the dollar. If we
correct all the figures for inflation by putting them in terms of
“constant 1958 dollars” (i.e., where each dollar has roughly the same
purchasing power that the dollar could command in 1958), then the
relevant figures become as follows: 1934—total social welfare spending,
\$13.7 billion; direct welfare aid, \$5.9 billion. In 1976—total social
welfare spending, \$247.7 billion; direct welfare aid, \$36.5 billion.

Even if we correct the figures for inflation, then, social welfare
spending by the government rose by the vast amount of 1,798 percent, or
42.8 percent per year over these 42 years, while direct welfare aid rose
519 percent, or 12.4 percent per annum. Furthermore, if we look at the
figures for 1950 and for 1976 for direct welfare aid, corrected for
inflation, we find that welfare spending went up, during the intervening
boom years, by 1,077 percent, or 41.4 percent per annum.

If we adjust the figures still further to correct for population growth
(total American population was 126 million in 1934, 215 million in
1976), then we still get an almost tenfold increase in total social
welfare expenditures (from \$108 to \$1,152 per capita in constant 1958
dollars), and a more than tripling of direct public aid (from \$47 in
1934 to \$170 per capita in 1976).

A few more comparisons: from 1955 to 1976—years of great prosperity—the
total number of people on welfare quintupled, from 2.2 to 11.2 million.
From 1952 to 1970, the population of children 18 years old and younger
increased by 42 percent; the number on welfare, however, increased by
400 percent. The total population remained static, yet the number of
welfare recipients in New York City jumped from 330,000 in 1960 to 1.2
million in 1971. Clearly, a welfare crisis is upon
us.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn1)^

The crisis is shown to be far greater if we include in “welfare
payments” all social welfare aids to the poor. Thus, federal “aid to the
poor” nearly tripled from 1960 to 1969, leaping from \$9.5 billion to
\$27.7 billion. State and local social welfare expenditures zoomed from
\$3.3 billion in 1935 to \$46 billion, a 1,300 percent increase! Total
social welfare expenditures for 1969, federal, state, and local,
amounted to a staggering \$73.7 billion.

Most people think of being on welfare as a process external to the
welfare clients themselves, as almost a natural disaster (like a tidal
wave or volcanic eruption) that occurs beyond and despite the will of
the people on welfare. The usual dictum is that “poverty” is the cause
of individuals or families being on welfare. But on whatever criterion
one wants to define poverty, on the basis of any chosen income level, it
is undeniable that the number of people or families below that “poverty
line” has been steadily *decreasing* since the 1930s, not vice versa.
Thus, the extent of poverty can scarcely account for the spectacular
growth in the welfare clientele.

The solution to the puzzle becomes clear once one realizes that the
number of welfare recipients has what is called in economics a “positive
supply function”; in other words, that when the *incentives* to go on
welfare rise, the welfare rolls will lengthen, and that a similar result
will occur if the *disincentives* to go on welfare become weaker. Oddly
enough, nobody challenges this finding in any *other* area of the
economy. Suppose, for example, that someone (whether the government or a
dotty billionaire is not important here) offers an extra \$10,000 to
everyone who will work in a shoe factory. Clearly, the supply of eager
workers in the shoe business will multiply. The same will happen when
*dis*incentives are reduced, e.g., if the government promises to relieve
every shoe worker from paying income taxes. If we begin to apply the
same analysis to welfare clientele as to all other areas of economic
life, the answer to the welfare puzzle becomes crystal-clear.

What, then, are the important incentives/disincentives for going on
welfare, and how have they been changing? Clearly, an extremely
important factor is the relation between the income to be gained on
welfare, *as compared with* the income to be earned from productive
work. Suppose, to put it simply, that the “average,” or going wage (very
roughly, the wage open to an “average” worker), in a certain area is
\$7,000 a year. Suppose, also, that the income to be obtained from
welfare is \$3,000 a year. This means that the average *net* gain to be
made from working (before taxes) is \$4,000 a year. Suppose now that the
welfare payments go up to \$5,000 (or, alternatively, that the average
wage is reduced to \$5,000). The differential—the net gain to be made
from working—has now been cut in half, reduced from \$4,000 to \$2,000 a
year. It stands to reason that the result will be an enormous increase
in the welfare rolls (which will increase still more when we consider
that the \$7,000 workers will have to pay higher taxes in order to
support a swollen and virtually nontaxpaying welfare clientele). We
would then expect that if—as, of course, has been the case—welfare
payment levels have been rising faster than average wages, an increasing
number of people will flock to the welfare rolls. This effect will be
still greater if we consider that, of course, not everyone earns the
“average”; it will be the “marginal” workers, the ones earning below the
average, who will flock to the welfare rolls. In our example, if the
welfare payment rises to \$5,000 a year, what can we expect to happen to
the workers making \$4,000? \$5,000? or even \$6,000? The \$5,000-a-year
man who previously earned a net of \$2,000 higher than the welfare
client now finds that his differential has been reduced to zero, that he
is making no more—even *less* after taxes!—than the welfare client kept
in idleness by the state. Is it any wonder that he will begin to flock
to the welfare bonanza?

Specifically, during the period between 1952 and 1970, when the welfare
rolls quintupled from 2 to 10 million, the average monthly benefit of a
welfare family more than doubled, from \$82 to \$187, an increase of
almost 130 percent at a time when consumer prices were rising by only 50
percent. Furthermore, in 1968, the Citizens Budget Commission of New
York City compared the ten states in the Union having the fastest rise
in welfare rolls with the ten states enjoying the lowest rate of growth.
The Commission found that the average monthly welfare benefit in the ten
fastest-growing states was twice as high as in the ten slowest states.
(Monthly welfare payments per person averaged \$177 in the former group
of states, and only \$88 in the latter.)^[2](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn2)^

Another example of the impact of high welfare payments and of their
relation to wages available from working was cited by the McCone
Commission investigating the Watts riot of 1965. The Commission found
that a job at the minimum wage paid about \$220 a month, out of which
had to come such work-related expenses as clothing and transportation.
In contrast, the average welfare family in the area received from \$177
to \$238 a month, out of which no work-related expenses had to be
deducted.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn3)^

Another powerful factor in swelling the welfare rolls is the increasing
disappearance of the various sturdy disincentives for going on welfare.
The leading disincentive has always been the stigma that every person on
the welfare dole used to feel, the stigma of being parasitic and living
off production instead of contributing to production. This stigma has
been socially removed by the permeating values of modern liberalism;
furthermore, the government agencies and social workers themselves have
increasingly rolled out the red carpet to welcome and even urge people
to get on welfare as quickly as possible. The “classical” view of the
social worker was to help people to help themselves, to aid people in
achieving and maintaining their independence and to stand on their own
feet. For welfare clients, the aim of social workers used to be to help
them get *off* the welfare rolls as quickly as possible. But now social
workers have the opposite aim: to try to get as many people *on* welfare
as possible, to advertise and proclaim their “rights.” The result has
been a continuing easing of eligibility requirements, a reduction in red
tape, and the withering away of the enforcing of residency, work, or
even income requirements for being on the dole. Anyone who suggests,
however faintly, that welfare recipients should be required to accept
employment and get off the dole is considered a reactionary moral leper.
And with the old stigma increasingly removed, people now tend more and
more to move rapidly toward welfare instead of shrinking from it. Irving
Kristol has trenchantly written of the “welfare explosion” of the 1960s:

> This “explosion” was created—in part intentionally, in larger part
> unwittingly by public officials and public employees who were
> executing public policies as part of a “War on Poverty.” And these
> policies had been advocated and enacted by many of the same people who
> were subsequently so bewildered by the “welfare explosion.” Not
> surprisingly it took them a while to realize that the problem they
> were trying to solve was the problem they were creating.

Here... are the reasons behind the “welfare explosion” of the 1960s:

> 1. The number of poor people who are eligible for welfare will
> increase as one elevates the official definitions of “poverty” and
> “need.” The War on Poverty elevated these official definitions;
> therefore, an increase in the number of “eligibles” automatically
> followed.
>
> 2. The number of eligible poor who actually apply for welfare will
> increase as welfare benefits go up—as they did throughout the 1960s.
> When welfare payments (and associated benefits, such as Medicaid and
> food stamps) compete with low wages, many poor people will rationally
> prefer welfare. In New York City today, as in many other large cities,
> welfare benefits not only compete with low wages; they outstrip them.
>
> 3. The reluctance of people actually eligible for welfare to apply for
> it—a reluctance based on pride or ignorance or fear—will diminish if
> any organized campaign is instituted to “sign them up.” Such a
> campaign was successfully launched in the 1960s by (a) various
> community organizations sponsored and financed by the Office of
> Economic Opportunity, (b) the Welfare Rights Movement, and (c) the
> social work profession, which was now populated by college graduates
> who thought it their moral duty to help people get on welfare—instead
> of, as used to be the case, helping them get off welfare. In addition,
> the courts cooperated by striking down various legal obstacles (for
> example, residence requirements). ...
>
> Somehow, the fact that more poor people are on welfare, receiving more
> generous payments, does not seem to have made this country a nice
> place to live—not even for the poor on welfare, whose condition seems
> not noticeably better than when they were poor and off welfare.
> Something appears to have gone wrong; a liberal and compassionate
> social policy has bred all sorts of unanticipated and perverse
> consequences.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn4)^

The spirit that used to animate the social work profession was a far
different—and a libertarian—one. There were two basic principles: (a)
that all relief and welfare payments should be voluntary, by private
agencies, rather than by the coercive levy of government; and (b) that
the object of giving should be to help the recipient become independent
and productive as soon as possible. Of course, in ultimate logic, (b)
follows from (a), since no private agency is able to tap the virtually
unlimited funds that can be mulcted from the long-suffering taxpayer.
Since private aid funds are strictly limited, there is therefore no room
for the idea of welfare “rights” as an unlimited and permanent claim on
the production of others. As a further corollary of the limitation on
funds, the social workers also realized that there was no room for aid
to malingerers, those who refused to work, or who used the aid as a
racket; hence came the concept of the “deserving” as against the
“undeserving” poor. Thus, the nineteenth-century laissez-faire English
agency, the Charity Organisation Society, included among the undeserving
poor ineligible for aid those who did not need relief, impostors, and
the man whose “condition is due to improvidence or thriftlessness, and
there is no hope of being able to make him independent of charitable...
assistance in the future.”^[5](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn5)^

English laissez-faire liberalism, even though it generally accepted
“Poor Law” governmental welfare, insisted that there be a strong
disincentive effect: not only strict eligibility rules for assistance,
but also making the workhouse conditions unpleasant enough to insure
that workhouse relief would be a strong deterrent rather than an
attractive opportunity. For the “undeserving poor,” those responsible
for their own fate, abuse of the relief system could only be curbed by
“making it as distasteful as possible to the applicants; that is, by
insisting (as a general rule) on a labour test or residence in a
workhouse.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn6)^

While a strict deterrent is far better than an open welcome and a
preachment about the recipients’ “rights,” the libertarian position
calls for the complete abolition of governmental welfare and reliance on
private charitable aid, based as it necessarily will be on helping the
“deserving poor” on the road to independence as rapidly as possible.
There was, after all, little or no governmental welfare in the United
States until the Depression of the 1930s and yet—in an era of a far
lower general standard of living—there was no mass starvation in the
streets. A highly successful private welfare program in the present-day
is the one conducted by the three-million-member Mormon Church. This
remarkable people, hounded by poverty and persecution, emigrated to Utah
and nearby states in the nineteenth century, and by thrift and hard work
raised themselves to a general level of prosperity and affluence. Very
few Mormons are on welfare; Mormons are taught to be independent,
self-reliant, and to shun the public dole. Mormons are devout believers
and have therefore successfully internalized these admirable values.
Furthermore, the Mormon Church operates an extensive private welfare
plan for its members—based, again, on the principle of helping their
members toward independence as rapidly as possible.

Note, for example, the following principles from the “Welfare Plan” of
the Mormon Church.

> Ever since its organization in 1830, the Church has encouraged its
> members to establish and maintain their economic independence; it has
> encouraged thrift and fostered the establishment of
> employment-creating industries; it has stood ready at all times to
> help needy faithful members.
>
> In 1936, the Mormon Church developed a
>
> Church Welfare Plan... a system under which the curse of idleness
> would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and
> independence, industry, thrift and self-respect be once more
> established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the
> people to help themselves. Work is to be enthroned as the ruling
> principle of the lives of our Church
> membership.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn7)^

Mormon social workers in the program are instructed to act accordingly:

> Faithful to this principle, welfare workers will earnestly teach and
> urge Church members to be self-sustaining to the full extent of their
> powers. No true Latter-Day Saint will, while physically able,
> voluntarily shift from himself the burden of his own support. So long
> as he can, under the inspiration of the Almighty and with his own
> labors, he will supply himself with the necessities of
> life.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn8)^

The immediate objectives of the welfare program are to:

> 1. Place in gainful employment those who are able to work.
>
> 2. Provide employment within the Welfare Program, in so far as
> possible, for those who cannot be placed in gainful employment. 3.
> Acquire the means with which to supply the needy, for whom the Church
> assumes responsibility, with the necessities of
> life.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn9)^

Insofar as possible, this program is carried on in small, decentralized,
grass-roots groups:

> Families, neighbors, quorums and wards and other Church organizational
> units may find it wise and desirable to form small groups for
> extending mutual help one to the other. Such groups may plant and
> harvest crops, process foods, store food, clothing and fuel, and carry
> out other projects for their mutual
> benefit.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn10)^

Specifically, the Mormon bishops and priesthood quorums are enjoined to
aid their brethren to self-help:

> In his temporal administrations the bishop looks at every able-bodied
> needy person as a purely temporary problem, caring for him until he
> can help himself. The priesthood quorum must look at its needy member
> as a continuing problem until not alone his temporal needs are met but
> his spiritual ones also. As a concrete example—a bishop extends help
> while the artisan or craftsman is out of work and in want; a
> priesthood quorum assists in establishing him in work and tries to see
> that he becomes fully self-supporting and active in his priesthood
> duties.

Concrete rehabilitation activities for needy members enjoined upon the
priesthood quorums include:

> 1. Placing quorum members and members of their families in permanent
> jobs. In some instances through trade school training,
> apprenticeships, and in other ways, quorums have assisted their quorum
> members to qualify themselves for better jobs. 2. Assisting quorum
> members and their families to get established in businesses of their
> own.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn11)^

The prime objective of the Mormon Church is to find jobs for their
needy. To this end,

> The finding of suitable jobs, under the Welfare Program, is a major
> responsibility of priesthood quorum members. They and members of the
> Relief Society should be constantly on the alert for employment
> opportunities. If every member of the ward welfare committee does well
> his or her work in this respect, most of the unemployed will be placed
> in gainful employment at the group or ward
> level.^[12](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn12)^

Other members are rehabilitated as self-employed, the church may aid
with a small loan, and the member’s priesthood quorum may guarantee
repayment from its funds. Those Mormons who cannot be placed in jobs or
rehabilitated as self-employed “are to be given, in so far as possible,
work at productive labor on Church properties.” The Church is insistent
on work by the recipient as far as possible:

> It is imperative that people being sustained through the bishops’
> storehouse program work to the extent of their ability, thus earning
> what they receive. ... Work of an individual on welfare projects
> should be considered as temporary rather than permanent employment. It
> should nevertheless continue so long as assistance is rendered to the
> individual through the bishops storehouse program. In this way the
> spiritual welfare of people will be served as their temporal needs are
> supplied. Feelings of diffidence will be
> removed.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn13)^

Failing other work, the bishop may assign welfare recipients to aid
individual members who are in need of help, the aided members
reimbursing the Church at prevailing wage rates. In general, in return
for their assistance, the welfare recipients are expected to make
whatever contributions they can to the Church welfare program, either in
funds, produce, or by their labor.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn14)^

Complementary to this comprehensive system of private aid on the
principle of fostering independence, the Mormon Church sternly
discourages its members from going on public welfare. “It is requested
that local Church officers stress the importance of each individual,
each family and each Church community becoming self-sustaining and
independent of public relief.” And: “To seek and accept direct public
relief all too often invites the curse of idleness and fosters the other
evils of dole. It destroys one’s independence, industry, thrift and
self-respect.”^[15](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn15)^

There is no finer model than the Mormon Church for a private, voluntary,
rational, individualistic welfare program. Let government welfare be
abolished, and one would expect that numerous such programs for rational
mutual aid would spring up throughout the country.

The inspiring example of the Mormon Church is a demonstration that the
major determinant of who or how many people go on public welfare is
their cultural and moral values rather than their level of income.
Another example is the group of Albanian-Americans in New York City.

Albanian-Americans are an extremely poor group, and in New York they are
almost invariably poor slum dwellers. Statistics are scanty, but their
average income is undoubtedly lower than that of the more highly
publicized blacks and Puerto Ricans. Yet there is not a single
Albanian-American on welfare. Why? Because of their pride and
independence. As one of their leaders stated: “Albanians do not beg, and
to Albanians, taking welfare is like begging in the
street.”^[16](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn16)^

A similar case is the decaying, poor, largely Polish-American and almost
totally Catholic community of Northside, in Brooklyn, New York. Despite
the low incomes, blight, and old and deteriorating housing in the area,
there are virtually no welfare recipients in this community of 15,000.
Why? Rudolph J. Stobierski, president of the Northside Community
Development Council, supplied the answer: “They consider welfare an
insult.”^[17](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn17)^

In addition to the impact of religion and ethnic differences on values,
Professor Banfield, in his brilliant book, *The Unheavenly City*, has
demonstrated the importance of what he calls “upper-class” or
“lower-class” culture in influencing the values of their members. The
definitions of “class” in Banfield are not strictly income or status
levels, but they tend to overlap strongly with these more common
definitions. His definitions of class center on the different attitudes
toward the present and the future: upper- and middle-class members tend
to be future-oriented, purposeful, rational, and self-disciplined.
Lower-class people, on the other hand, tend to have a strong
present-orientation, are capricious, hedonistic, purposeless, and
therefore unwilling to pursue a job or a career with any consistency.
People with the former values therefore *tend* to have higher incomes
and better jobs, and lower-class people *tend* to be poor, jobless, or
on welfare. In short, the economic fortunes of people tend over the long
run to be their own internal responsibility, rather than to be
determined—as liberals always insist—by external factors. Thus, Banfield
quotes Daniel Rosenblatt’s findings on the lack of interest in medical
care due to the “general lack of future orientation” among the urban
poor:

> For example, regular checkups of automobiles to detect incipient
> defects are not in the general value system of the urban poor. In
> similar fashion, household objects are often worn out and discarded
> rather than repaired at an early stage of disintegration. Installment
> buying is easily accepted without an awareness of the length of
> payments.
>
> The body can be seen as simply another class of objects to be worn out
> but not repaired. Thus, teeth are left without dental care; later
> there is often small interest in dentures, whether free or not. In any
> event, false teeth may be little used. Corrective eye examinations,
> even for those people who wear glasses, are often neglected—regardless
> of clinic facilities. It is as though the middle class thinks of the
> body as a machine to be preserved and kept in perfect running order
> whether through prosthetic devices, rehabilitation, cosmetic surgery,
> or perpetual treatment, whereas the poor think of the body as having a
> limited span of utility: to be enjoyed in youth and then, with age and
> decrepitude, to be suffered and endured
> stoically.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn18)^

Banfield points out, furthermore, that lower-class death rates are, and
have been for generations, far higher than for upper-class persons. Much
of the differential is caused not by poverty or low incomes per se, as
much as by the values or culture of the lower-class citizens. Thus,
prominent and particularly lower-class causes of death are alcoholism,
narcotics addiction, homicide, and venereal disease. Infant mortality
has also been far higher among the lower classes, ranging up to two and
three times that of upper groups. That this is due to cultural values
rather than to income level may be seen in Banfield’s comparison of
turn-of-the-century Irish immigrants with Russian Jewish immigrants in
New York City. The Irish immigrants were, in those days, generally
present-minded and “lower class” in attitudes, while the Russian Jews,
though living in overcrowded tenements and on an income level probably
lower than the Irish, were unusually future-minded, purposive, and
“upper class” in their values and attitudes. At the turn of the century,
the life expectancy at the age of ten of an Irish immigrant was only 38
years, whereas for the Russian Jewish immigrant it was more than 50
years. Furthermore, whereas in 1911–1916, in a study of seven cities,
the infant mortality was over three times as high for the lowest as
compared to the highest income groups, the Jewish infant mortality was
extremely low.^[19](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn19)^

As in illness or mortality, so in unemployment—which obviously has a
close relation to both poverty and welfare. Banfield cites the findings
of Professor Michael J. Piore on the essential “unemployability” of many
or most of the persistently low-income unemployed. Piore discovered that
their difficulty was not so much in finding or learning the skills for
steady, well-paying jobs as in the lack of personal fibre in sticking to
such jobs. These people are inclined to high absenteeism, leaving their
jobs without notice, being insubordinate, and sometimes stealing from
the employer.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn20)^ Furthermore, Peter
Doeringer’s study of the Boston “ghetto” labor market in 1968 found that
about 70 percent of job applicants referred by neighborhood employment
centers received job offers—but that over half of these offers were
rejected, and of those accepted only about 40 percent of the new workers
kept their jobs for as long as one month. Doeringer concluded: “Much of
the ghetto unemployment appears to be a result of work instability
rather than job scarcity.”^[21](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn21)^

It is highly instructive to compare the descriptions of this common
refusal of the lower-class unemployed to engage in steady work by the
frostily disapproving Professor Banfield and by the highly approving
leftist sociologist Alvin Gouldner. Banfield: “Men accustomed to a
street-corner style of life, to living off women on welfare, and to
‘hustling’ are seldom willing to accept the dull routines of the ‘good’
job.”^[22](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn22)^ Pondering the lack of success of
welfare workers in luring these men “away from a life of
irresponsibility, sensuality, and freewheeling aggression,” Gouldner
proclaims that they judge the proferred bargain to be unattractive:

> Give up promiscuous sex, give up freely expressed aggression, and wild
> spontaneity... and you, or your children, may be admitted to the world
> of three square meals a day, to a high school or perhaps even a
> college education, to the world of charge accounts, of secure jobs and
> respectability.”^[23](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn23)^

The interesting point is that from both ends of the ideological spectrum
both Banfield and Gouldner agree on the essential nature of this
process, despite their contrasting value judgments on it: that much of
persistent lower-class unemployment, and hence poverty, is voluntary on
the part of the unemployed themselves.

Gouldner’s attitude is typical of liberals and leftists in the present
day: that it is shameful to try to foist, even noncoercively,
“bourgeois” or “middle-class values” on the gloriously spontaneous and
“natural” lower-class culture. Fair enough, perhaps; but then don’t
expect—or call upon—those same hard-working bourgeoisie to be coerced
into supporting and subsidizing those very parasitic values of idleness
and irresponsibility which they abhor—and which are clearly
dysfunctional for the survival of any society. If people wish to be
“spontaneous,” let them do so on their own time and with their own
resources, and let them then take the consequences of this decision, and
not use State coercion to force the hardworking and “unspontaneous” to
bear those consequences instead. In short, abolish the welfare system.

If the major problem with the lower-class poor is irresponsible
present-mindedness, and if it takes the inculcation of “bourgeois”
future-minded values to get people off welfare and dependency (*pace*
the Mormons), then at the very least these values should be encouraged
and not discouraged in society. The left-liberal attitudes of social
workers discourage the poor directly by fostering the idea of welfare as
a “right” and as a moral claim upon production. Furthermore, the easy
availability of the welfare check obviously promotes present-mindedness,
unwillingness to work, and irresponsibility among the recipients—thus
perpetuating the vicious cycle of poverty-welfare. As Banfield puts it,
“there is perhaps no better way to make converts to present-mindedness
than to give a generous welfare check to
everyone.”^[24](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn24)^

Generally, in their attacks on the welfare system conservatives have
focussed on the ethical and moral evils of coercively mulcting the
taxpayers to support the idle, while the leftist critics have
concentrated on the demoralization of the welfare “clients” through
their dependency on the largesse of the State and its bureaucracy.
Actually, both sets of criticisms are right; there is no contradiction
between them. We have seen that voluntary programs such as those of the
Mormon Church are keenly alive to this problem. And in fact, earlier
laissez-faire critics of the dole were just as concerned with the
demoralization as with the coercion over those forced to pay for
welfare.

Thus, the nineteenth-century English laissez-faire advocate Thomas
Mackay declared that welfare reform “consists in a re-creation and
development of the arts of independence.” He called “not for more
philanthropy, but rather for more respect for the dignity of human life,
and more faith in its ability to work out its own salvation.” And Mackay
poured his scorn on the advocates of greater welfare, on

> the vicarious philanthropist who, in a reckless race after a cheap
> popularity, uses the rate \[tax\] extorted from his neighbors to
> multiply the occasions of stumbling set before the... crowd who are
> only too ready to fall into
> dependence.^[25](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn25)^

Mackay added that the

> legal endowment of destitution” implied by the welfare system
> “introduces a most dangerous and at times demoralising influence into
> our social arrangements. Its real necessity is by no means proved. Its
> apparent necessity arises mainly from the fact that the system has
> created its own dependent
> population.^[26](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn26)^

Elaborating on the theme of dependence, Mackay observed that

> the bitterest element in the distress of the poor arises, not from
> mere poverty, but from the feeling of dependence which must of
> necessity be an ingredient in every measure of public relief. This
> feeling cannot be removed, but is rather intensified by liberal
> measures of public relief.^[27](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn27)^

Mackay concluded that

> the only way in which the legislator or the administrator can promote
> the reduction of pauperism is by abolishing or restricting the legal
> endowments provided for pauperism. The country can have, there is no
> doubt of it, exactly as many paupers as it chooses to pay for. Abolish
> or restrict that endowment... and new agencies are called into
> activity, man’s natural capacity for independence, the natural ties of
> relationship and friendship, and under this head I would include
> private as distinguished from public
> charity.^[28](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn28)^

The Charity Organisation Society, England’s leading private charity
agency in the late nineteenth century, operated precisely on this
principle of aid to foster self-help. As Mowat, the historian of the
Society notes:

> The C.O.S. embodied an idea of charity which claimed to reconcile the
> divisions in society, to remove poverty and to produce a happy,
> self-reliant community. It believed that the most serious aspect of
> poverty was the degradation of the character of the poor man or woman.
> Indiscriminate charity only made things worse; it demoralised. True
> charity demanded friendship, thought, the sort of help that would
> restore a man’s self-respect and his ability to support himself and
> his family.^[29](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn29)^

Perhaps one of the grimmest consequences of welfare is that it actively
discourages self-help by crippling the financial incentive for
rehabilitation. It has been estimated that, on the average, every dollar
invested by handicapped persons in their own rehabilitation brings them
from \$10 to \$17 in the present value of increased future earnings. But
this incentive is crippled by the fact that, by becoming rehabilitated,
they will lose their welfare relief, Social Security disability
payments, and workmen’s compensation. As a result, most of the disabled
decide not to invest in their own
rehabilitation.^[30](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn30)^ Many people, moreover,
are by now familiar with the crippling disincentive effects of the
Social Security system, which—in glaring contrast to all private
insurance funds—cuts off payments if the recipient should be brazen
enough to work and earn an income after age 62.

In these days, when most people look askance at population growth, few
antipopulationists have focussed on another unfortunate effect of the
welfare system: Since welfare families are paid proportionately to the
number of their children, the system provides an important subsidy for
the production of more children. Furthermore, the people being induced
to have more children are precisely those who can afford it least; the
result can only be to perpetuate their dependence on welfare, and, in
fact, to develop generations who are permanently dependent on the
welfare dole.

In recent years, there has been a great deal of agitation for the
government to supply day-care centers to care for children of working
mothers. Allegedly the market has failed to supply this much needed
service.

Since the market is in the business of meeting urgent consumer demands,
however, the question to ask is *why* the market seems to have failed in
this particular case. The answer is that the government has ringed the
supply of day-care service with a network of onerous and costly legal
restrictions. In short: while it is perfectly legal to deposit one’s
children with a friend or relative, no matter who the person is or the
condition of his apartment, or to hire a neighbor who will be taking
care of one or two children, let the friend or neighbor become a
slightly bigger business, and the State cracks down with a vengeance.
Thus, the State will generally insist that such day-care centers be
licensed and will refuse to grant the license unless registered nurses
are in attendance at all times, minimal playground facilities are
available, and the facility is of a minimum size. There will be all
sorts of other absurd and costly restrictions which the government does
not bother to impose on friends, relatives, and neighbors—or, indeed, on
mothers themselves. Remove these restrictions, and the market will go to
work to meet the demand.

For the past thirteen years the poet Ned O’Gorman has been operating a
successful, privately financed day-care center in Harlem on a
shoestring, but he is in danger of being put out of business by
bureaucratic restrictions imposed by the New York City government. While
the city admits the “dedication and effectiveness” of O’Gorman’s center,
The Storefront, it is threatening fines and ultimately the coercive
closing of the center unless he has a state-certified social worker
present whenever there are five or more children in attendance. As
O’Gorman indignantly remarks:

> Why on earth should I be forced to hire someone with a piece of paper
> that says they’ve studied social work and are qualified to run a
> day-care center? If I’m not qualified after thirteen years in Harlem,
> then who is?^[31](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn31)^

The example of day care demonstrates an important truth about the
market: if there seems to be a shortage of supply to meet an evident
demand, then look to government as the cause of the problem. Give the
market its head, and there will be no shortages of day-care centers,
just as there are no shortages of motels, of washing machines, of TV
sets, or of any of the other accoutrements of daily living.

## BURDENS AND SUBSIDIES OF THE WELFARE STATE [burdens-and-subsidies-of-the-welfare-state]

Does the modern welfare state really help the poor? The commonly held
notion, the idea that has propelled the welfare state and maintained it
in being, is that the welfare state redistributes income and wealth from
the rich to the poor: the progressive tax system takes money from the
rich while numerous welfare and other services distribute the money to
the poor. But even liberals, the great advocates and abettors of the
welfare state, are beginning to realize that every part and aspect of
this idea is merely a cherished myth. Government contracts, notably of
the military, funnel tax funds into the pockets of favored corporations
and well-paid industrial workers. Minimum wage laws tragically generate
unemployment, especially so among the poorest and least skilled or
educated workers—in the South, among teenage Negroes in the ghettoes,
and among the vocationally handicapped. Because a minimum wage, of
course, does not guarantee any worker’s employment; it only prohibits,
by force of law, anyone from being employed at the wage which would pay
his employer to hire him. It therefore compels unemployment. Economists
have demonstrated that raises in the federal minimum wage have created
the well-known Negro-white teenage employment gap, and have driven the
rate of male Negro teenage unemployment from an early postwar rate of
about 8 percent to what is now well over 35 percent—an unemployment rate
among teenage Negroes that is far more catastrophic than the massive
general unemployment rate of the 1930s (20–25
percent).^[32](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn32)^

We have already seen how State higher education redistributes income
from poorer to wealthier citizens. A host of government licensing
restrictions, permeating occupation after occupation, exclude poorer and
less skilled workers from these jobs. It is becoming recognized that
urban renewal programs, supposedly designed to aid the slum housing of
the poor, in fact demolish their housing and force the poor into more
crowded and less available housing, all for the benefit of wealthier
subsidized tenants, construction unions, favored real estate developers,
and downtown business interests. Unions, once the pampered favorites of
liberals, are now generally seen to use their governmental privileges to
exclude poorer and minority-group workers. Farm price supports, jacked
ever higher by the federal government, mulct the taxpayers in order to
push food prices higher and higher, thereby injuring particularly the
poor consumers and helping—*not* poor farmers, but the wealthy farmers
commanding a large amount of acreage. (Since farmers are paid per pound
or per bushel of product, the support program largely benefits the
wealthy farmers; in fact, since farmers are often paid *not* to produce,
the resulting taking of acreage out of production causes severe
unemployment among the poorest segment of the farm population—the farm
tenants and farm workers.) Zoning laws in the burgeoning suburbs of the
United States serve to keep out the poorer citizens by legal coercion,
very often Negroes who are attempting to move out of the inner cities to
follow increasing job opportunities in the suburbs. The U.S. Postal
Service charges high monopoly rates on the first-class mail used by the
general public in order to subsidize the distribution of newspapers and
magazines. The FHA subsidizes the mortgages of well-to-do homeowners.
The Federal Bureau of Reclamation subsidizes irrigation water to
well-to-do farmers in the West, thereby depriving the urban poor of
water and forcing them to pay higher water charges. The Rural
Electrification Administration and the Tennessee Valley Authority
subsidize electric service to well-to-do farmers, suburbanites, and
corporations. As Professor Brozen sardonically observes:

> Electricity for poverty-stricken corporations such as the Aluminum
> Corporation of America and the DuPont Company is subsidized by the
> tax-free status of the Tennessee Valley Authority (27 percent of the
> price of electricity goes to pay the taxes imposed on privately
> operated utilities).^[33](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn33)^

And the government regulation monopolizes and cartelizes much of
industry, thereby driving up prices to consumers and restricting
production, competitive alternatives, or improvements in products (e.g.,
railroad regulation, public utility regulation, airline regulation, oil
proration laws). Thus, the Civil Aeronautics Board allocates airline
routes to favored companies and keeps out and even drives out of
business smaller competitors. State and federal oil proration laws
provide for absolute maximum limits on crude oil production, thereby
driving up oil prices, prices that are further kept up by import
restrictions. And government throughout the country grants an absolute
monopoly in each area to gas, electric, and telephone companies, thus
protecting them from competition, and sets their rates in order to
guarantee them a fixed profit. Everywhere and in every area the story is
the same: a systematic mulcting of the mass of the population by the
“welfare state.”^[34](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn34)^

Most people believe that the American tax system basically taxes the
rich far more than it taxes the poor and is therefore a method of
redistributing income from higher to lower income classes. (There are,
of course, many *other* kinds of redistribution, e.g., from the
taxpayers to Lockheed or General Dynamics.) But even the federal income
tax, which everybody assumes to be “progressive” (taxing the rich far
more than the poor, with the middle classes in between), does not really
work that way when we take into account other aspects of this tax. For
example, the Social Security tax is blatantly and starkly “regressive,”
since it is a soak-the-poor-and-middle-class tax: a person making the
base income (\$8,000) pays fully as much Social Security tax—and the
amount is rising every year—as someone making \$1,000,000 a year.
Capital gains, mostly accruing to wealthy stockholders and owners of
real estate, pay far less than income taxes; private trusts and
foundations are tax exempt, and interest earned on state and municipal
government bonds is also exempt from the federal income tax. We wind up
with the following estimate of what percentage of income is paid,
overall, by each “income class” in federal taxes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Image](209_img01.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If federal taxes are scarcely “progressive,” the impact of state and
local taxes is almost fiercely regressive. Property taxes are (a)
proportional, (b) hit only owners of real estate, and (c) depend on the
political vagaries of local assessors. Sales and excise taxes hit the
poor more than anyone else. The following is the estimate of the
percentage of income extracted, overall, by state and local taxes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Image](210_img01.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Following are the combined estimates for the total impact of
taxation—federal, state, and local—on income classes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Image](210_img02.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Still more recent (1968) estimates of the total impact of taxes on all
levels of government amply confirm the above, while also showing a far
greater relative rise in the three years of the tax burden on the lowest
income groups:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Image](211_img01.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many economists try to mitigate the impact of these telltale figures by
saying that the people in the “Under \$2,000” category, for example,
receive more in welfare and other “transfer” payments than they pay out
in taxes; but of course this ignores the vital fact that the *same*
people in each category are *not* the welfare receivers *and* the
taxpayers. The latter group is socked heavily in order to subsidize the
former. In short, the poor (and the middle class) are taxed in order to
pay for the subsidized public housing of *other* poor—*and*
middle-income groups. And it is the working poor who are socked a
staggering amount to pay for the subsidies of the welfare poor.

There is plenty of income redistribution in this country: to Lockheed,
to welfare recipients, and so on and on, but the “rich” are not being
taxed to pay for the “poor.” The redistribution is *within* income
categories; some poor are forced to pay for other poor.

Other tax estimates confirm this chilling picture. The Tax Foundation,
for example, estimates that federal, state, and local taxes extract 34
percent of the overall income of those who make less than \$3,000 a
year.^[37](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn37)^

The object of this discussion is not, of course, to advocate a “really”
progressive income tax structure, a real soaking of the rich, but to
point out that the modern welfare state, highly touted as soaking the
rich to subsidize the poor, does no such thing. In fact, soaking the
rich would have disastrous effects, not just for the rich but for the
poor and middle classes themselves. For it is the rich who provide a
proportionately greater amount of saving, investment capital,
entrepreneurial foresight, and financing of technological innovation
that has brought the United States to by far the highest standard of
living—for the mass of the people—of any country in history. Soaking the
rich would not only be profoundly immoral, it would drastically penalize
the very virtues: thrift, business foresight, and investment, that have
brought about our remarkable standard of living. It would truly be
killing the goose that lays the golden eggs.

## WHAT CAN GOVERNMENT DO? [what-can-government-do]

What, then, *can* the government do to help the poor? The only correct
answer is also the libertarian answer: Get out of the way. Let the
government get out of the way of the productive energies of all groups
in the population, rich, middle class, and poor alike, and the result
will be an enormous increase in the welfare and the standard of living
of everyone, and most particularly of the poor who are the ones
supposedly helped by the miscalled “welfare state.”

There are four major ways in which the government can get out of the way
of the American people. First, it can abolish—or at the very least
drastically reduce—the level of all taxation, taxation which cripples
productive energies, savings, investment, and technological advance. In
fact, the creation of jobs and increase of wage rates resulting from
abolishing these taxes would benefit the lower-income groups *more* than
anyone else. As Professor Brozen points out:

> With less attempt to use state power to compress the inequality in the
> distribution of income, inequality would diminish more rapidly. Low
> wage rates would rise more rapidly with a higher rate of saving and
> capital formation, and inequality would diminish with the rise in
> income of wage earners.^[38](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn38)^

The best way to help the poor is to slash taxes and allow savings,
investment, and creation of jobs to proceed unhampered. As Dr. F.A.
Harper pointed out years ago, productive investment is the “greatest
economic charity.” Wrote Harper:

> According to one view, sharing a crust of bread is advocated as the
> method of charity. The other advocates savings and tools for the
> production of additional loaves of bread, which is the greatest
> economic charity.
>
> The two views are in conflict because the two methods are mutually
> exclusive in absorbing one’s time and means in all the choices he
> makes day by day. ...
>
> The reason for the difference in view really stems from different
> concepts about the nature of the economic world. The former view stems
> from the belief that the total of economic goods is a constant. The
> latter view is built on the belief that expansion in production is
> possible without any necessary limit.
>
> The difference between the two views is like the difference between a
> two-and three-dimensional perspective of production. The
> two-dimensional size is fixed at any instant of time, but the third
> dimension and therefore the size of the total is expandable without
> limit by savings and tools. ...
>
> All the history of mankind denies that there is a fixed total of
> economic goods. History further reveals that savings and expansion of
> tools constitute the only way to any appreciable
> increase.^[39](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn39)^

The libertarian writer Isabel Paterson put the case eloquently:

> As between the private philanthropist and the private capitalist
> acting as such, take the case of the truly needy man, who is not
> incapacitated, and suppose that the philanthropist gives him food and
> clothes and shelter—when he has used them, he is just where he was
> before, except that he may have acquired the habit of dependence. But
> suppose someone with no benevolent motive whatever, simply wanting
> work done for his own reasons, should hire the needy man for a wage.
> The employer has not done a good deed. Yet the condition of the
> employed man has actually been changed. What is the vital difference
> between the two actions?
>
> It is that the unphilanthropic employer has brought the man he
> employed *back into the production line*, on the great circuit of
> energy; whereas the philanthropist can only divert energy in such
> manner that there can be no return into production, and therefore less
> likelihood of the object of his benefaction finding employment. ...
>
> If the full role of *sincere* philanthropists were called, from the
> beginning of time, it would be found that all of them together by
> their strictly philanthropic activities have never conferred upon
> humanity one-tenth of the benefit derived from the normally
> self-interested efforts of Thomas Alva Edison, to say nothing of the
> greater minds who worked out the scientific principles which Edison
> applied. Innumerable speculative thinkers, inventors, and organizers,
> have contributed to the comfort, health, and happiness of their fellow
> men—because that was not their
> objective.^[40](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn40)^

Second, and as a corollary to a drastic reduction or abolition of
taxation, would come an equivalent reduction in government expenditures.
No longer would scarce economic resources be siphoned off into wasteful
and unproductive expenditures: *into* the multibillion dollar space
program, public works, the military-industrial complex, or whatever.
Instead, these resources would be available to produce goods and
services desired by the mass of the consuming population. The outpouring
of goods and services would provide new and better goods to the
consumers at far lower prices. No longer would we suffer the
inefficiencies and the injury to productivity of government subsidies
and contracts. Furthermore, the diversion of most of the nation’s
scientists and engineers to wasteful military and other governmental
research and expenditure would be released for peaceful and productive
activities and inventions benefiting the nation’s
consumers.^[41](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn41)^

Third, if the government also cut out the numerous ways in which it
taxes the poorer to subsidize the wealthier, such as we have named above
(higher education, farm subsidies, irrigation, Lockheed, etc.), this in
itself would stop the government’s deliberate exactions upon the poor.
By ceasing to tax the poorer in order to subsidize the richer, the
government would aid the poor by removing its burdens from their
productive activity.

Finally, one of the most significant ways in which the government could
aid the poor is by removing its own direct roadblocks from their
productive energies. Thus, minimum wage laws disemploy the poorest and
least productive members of the population. Government privileges to
trade unions enable them to keep the poorer and minority-group workers
from productive and high-wage employment. And licensing laws, the
outlawing of gambling, and other government restrictions prevent the
poor from starting small businesses and creating jobs on their own.
Thus, the government has everywhere clamped onerous restrictions on
peddling, ranging from outright prohibition to heavy license fees.
Peddling was the classic path by which immigrants, poor and lacking
capital, were able to become entrepreneurs and eventually to become big
businessmen. But now this route has been cut off—largely to confer
monopoly privileges on each city’s retail stores, who fear that they
would lose profits if faced with the highly mobile competition of street
peddlers.

Typical of how government has frustrated the productive activities of
the poor is the case of the neurosurgeon Dr. Thomas Matthew, founder of
the black self-help organization NEGRO, which floats bonds to finance
its operations. In the mid-1960s, Dr. Matthew, over the opposition of
the New York City government, established a successful interracial
hospital in the black section of Jamaica, Queens. He soon found,
however, that public transportation in Jamaica was so abysmal that
transportation service was totally inadequate for the hospital’s
patients and staff. Finding bus service inadequate, Dr. Matthew
purchased a few busses and established a regular bus service in Jamaica,
service that was regular, efficient, and successful. The problem was
that Dr. Matthew did not have a city license to operate a bus line—that
privilege is reserved to inefficient but protected monopolies. The
ingenious Dr. Matthew, discovering that the city did not allow any
unlicensed busses to charge fares, made his bus service free, except
that any riders who wished could buy a 25¢ company bond instead whenever
they rode the busses.

So successful was the Matthew bus service that he proceeded to establish
another bus line in Harlem; but it was at this point, in early 1968,
that the New York City government took fright and cracked down. The
government went to court and put both lines out of business for
operating without licenses.

A few years later, Dr. Matthew and his colleagues seized an unused
building in Harlem owned by the city government. (The New York City
government is the city’s biggest “slumlord,” owning as it does a vast
amount of useful buildings abandoned because of nonpayment of high
property taxes and rotting away, rendered useless and uninhabitable.) In
this building, Dr. Matthew established a low-cost hospital—at a time of
soaring hospital costs and scarcity of hospital space. The city finally
succeeded in putting this hospital, too, out of business, claiming “fire
violations.” Again and again, in area after area, the role of government
has been to thwart the economic activities of the poor. It is no wonder
that when Dr. Matthew was asked by a white official of the New York City
government how it could best aid Negro self-help projects, Matthew
replied: “Get out of our way, and let us try something.”

Another example of how government functions occurred a few years ago,
when the federal and New York City governments loudly proclaimed that
they would rehabilitate a group of 37 buildings in Harlem. But instead
of following the usual practice of private industry and awarding
rehabilitation contracts on each house individually, the government
instead awarded one contract on the entire 37-building package. By doing
so, the government made sure that small, black-owned construction firms
would not be able to bid, and so the prize contract naturally went to a
large white-owned company. Still another example: In 1966, the federal
Small Business Administration proudly proclaimed a program for
encouraging new black-owned small business. But the government put
certain key restrictions on its loans. First, it decided that any
borrower must be “at the poverty level.” Now since the very poor are not
apt to be setting up their own businesses, this restriction ruled out
many small businesses by owners with moderately low incomes—just the
ones likely to be small entrepreneurs. To top this, the New York SBA
added a further restriction: All blacks seeking such loans must “prove a
real need in their community” for filling a recognizable “economic
void”—the need and the void to be proved to the satisfaction of remote
bureaucrats far from the actual economic
scene.^[42](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn42)^

A fascinating gauge of whether or to what extent government is helping
or hurting the poor in the “welfare state” is provided by an unpublished
study by the Institute for Policy Studies of Washington, D.C. An inquiry
was made on the estimated flow of government money (federal and
district) into the low-income Negro ghetto of Shaw-Cardozo in
Washington, D.C., as compared to the *outflow* that the area pays in
taxes to the government. In fiscal 1967, the Shaw-Cardozo area had a
population of 84,000 (of whom 79,000 were black) with a median family
income of \$5,600 per year. Total earned personal income for the
residents of the area for that year amounted to \$126.5 million. The
value of total government benefits flowing into the district (ranging
from welfare payments to the estimated expenditure on public schools)
during fiscal 1967 was estimated at \$45.7 million. A generous subsidy,
amounting to almost 40 percent of total Shaw-Cardozo income? Perhaps,
but against this we have to offset the total outflow of taxes from
Shaw-Cardozo, best estimated at \$50.0 million—a net *outflow* from this
low—income ghetto of \$4.3 million! Can it still be maintained that
abolition of the entire massive, unproductive welfare state structure
would hurt the poor?^[43](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn43)^

Government could then best help the poor—and the rest of society—by
getting out of the way: by removing its vast and crippling network of
taxes, subsidies, inefficiencies, and monopoly privileges. As Professor
Brozen summed up his analysis of the “welfare state”:

> The state has typically been a device for producing affluence for a
> few at the expense of many. The market has produced affluence for many
> with little cost even to a few. The state has not changed its ways
> since Roman days of bread and circuses for the masses, even though it
> now pretends to provide education and medicine as well as free milk
> and performing arts. It still is the source of monopoly privilege and
> power for the few behind its facade of providing welfare for the
> many—welfare which would be more abundant if politicians would not
> expropriate the means they use to provide the illusion that they care
> about their constituents.^[44](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn44)^

## THE NEGATIVE INCOME TAX [the-negative-income-tax]

Unfortunately, the recent trend—embraced by a wide spectrum of advocates
(with unimportant modifications) from President Nixon to Milton Friedman
on the right to a large number on the left—is to abolish the current
welfare system *not* in the direction of freedom but toward its very
opposite. This new trend is the “guaranteed annual income” or “negative
income tax,” or President Nixon’s “Family Assistance Plan.” Citing the
inefficiencies, inequities, and red tape of the present system, the
guaranteed annual income would make the dole easy, “efficient,” and
automatic: The income tax authorities will pay money each year to
families earning below a certain base income—this automatic dole to be
financed, of course, by taxing working families making *more* than the
base amount. Estimated costs of this seemingly neat and simple scheme
are supposed to be only a few billion dollars per year.

But there is an extremely important catch: the costs are estimated *on
the assumption* that everyone—the people on the universal dole as well
as those financing it—will continue to work to the same extent as
before. But this assumption begs the question. For the chief problem is
the enormously crippling disincentive effect the guaranteed annual
income will have on taxpayer and recipient alike.

The one element that saves the present welfare system from being an
utter disaster is precisely the red tape and the stigma involved in
going on welfare. The welfare recipient still bears a psychic stigma,
even though weakened in recent years, and he still has to face a
typically inefficient, impersonal, and tangled bureaucracy. But the
guaranteed annual income, *precisely* by making the dole efficient,
easy, and automatic, will remove the major obstacles, the major
disincentives, to the “supply function” for welfare, and will lead to a
massive flocking to the guaranteed dole. Moreover, everyone will now
consider the new dole as an automatic “right” rather than as a privilege
or gift, and all stigma will be removed.

Suppose, for example, that \$4,000 per year is declared the “poverty
line,” and that everyone earning income below that line receives the
difference from Uncle Sam automatically as a result of filling out his
income tax return. Those making zero income will receive \$4,000 from
the government, those making \$3,000 will get \$1,000, and so on. It
seems clear that there will be no real reason for *anyone* making less
than \$4,000 a year to keep on working. Why should he, when his
nonworking neighbor will wind up with the same income as himself? In
short, the *net* income from working will then be zero, and the entire
working population below the magic \$4,000 line will quit work and flock
to its “rightful” dole.

But this is not all; what of the people making either \$4,000, or
slightly or even moderately above that line? The man making \$4,500 a
year will soon find that the lazy slob next door who refuses to work
will be getting his \$4,000 a year from the federal government; his own
net income from forty hours a week of hard work will be only \$500 a
year. So he will quit work and go on the negative-tax dole. The same
will undoubtedly hold true for those making \$5,000 a year, etc.

The baleful process is not over. As all the people making below \$4,000
and even considerably above \$4,000 leave work and go on the dole, the
total dole payments will skyrocket enormously, and they can only be
financed by taxing *more* heavily the higher income folk who will
continue to work. But then *their* net, after-tax incomes will fall
sharply, until many of *them* will quit work and go on the dole too. Let
us contemplate the man making \$6,000 a year. He is, at the outset,
faced with a net income from working of only \$2,000, and if he has to
pay, let us say, \$500 a year to finance the dole of the nonworkers, his
net after-tax income will be only \$1,500 a year. If he then has to pay
*another* \$1,000 to finance the rapid expansion of others on the dole,
his net income will fall to \$500 and he will go on the dole. Thus, the
logical conclusion of the guaranteed annual income will be a vicious
spiral into disaster, heading toward the logical and impossible goal of
virtually no one working, and everyone on the dole.

In addition to all this, there are some important extra considerations.
In practice, of course, the dole, once set at \$4,000, will not remain
there; irresistible pressure by welfare clients and other pressure
groups will inexorably raise the base level every year, thereby bringing
the vicious spiral and economic disaster that much closer. In practice,
too, the guaranteed annual income will *not*, as in the hopes of its
conservative advocates, *replace* the existing patchwork welfare system;
it will simply be added *on top of* the existing programs. This, for
example, is precisely what happened to the states’ old-age relief
programs. The major talking point of the New Deal’s federal Social
Security program was that it would efficiently *replace* the then
existing patchwork old-age relief programs of the states. In practice,
of course, it did no such thing, and old-age relief is far higher now
than it was in the 1930s. An ever-rising Social Security structure was
simply placed on top of existing programs. In practice, finally,
President Nixon’s sop to conservatives that able-bodied recipients of
the new dole would be forced to work is a patent phony. They would, for
one thing, only have to find “suitable” work, and it is the universal
experience of state unemployment relief agencies that almost no
“suitable” jobs are ever found.^[45](#24-notes.html#chap08_fn45)^

The various schemes for a guaranteed annual income are no genuine
replacement for the universally acknowledged evils of the welfare
system; they would only plunge us still more deeply into those evils.
The only workable solution is the libertarian one: the abolition of the
welfare dole in favor of freedom and voluntary action for all persons,
rich and poor alike.

# 9 INFLATION AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE: THE COLLAPSE OF THE KEYNESIAN PARADIGM [16-chap09.html#page213]

Until the years 1973–1974, the Keynesians who had formed the ruling
economic orthodoxy since the late 1930s had been riding high, wide, and
handsome.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn1)^ Virtually everyone had
accepted the Keynesian view that there is something in the free-market
economy that makes it subject to swings of under- and overspending (in
practice, the Keynesian concern is almost exclusively with alleged
*under*spending), and that hence it is the function of the government to
compensate for this market defect. The government was to compensate for
this alleged imbalance by manipulating its spending and deficits (in
practice, to increase them). Guiding this vital “macroeconomic” function
of government, of course, was to be a board of Keynesian economists (the
“Council of Economic Advisors”), who would be able to “fine-tune” the
economy so as to prevent either inflation or recession, and to regulate
the proper amount of total spending so as to insure continuing full
employment without inflation.

It was in 1973–1974 that even the Keynesians finally realized that
something was very, very wrong with this confident scenario, that it was
time to go back in confusion to their drawing boards. For not only had
40-odd years of Keynesian fine-tuning *not* eliminated a chronic
inflation that had set in with World War II, but it was in those years
that inflation escalated temporarily into double-digit figures (to about
13 percent per annum). Not only that, it was also in 1973–1974 that the
United States plunged into its deepest and longest recession since the
1930s (it would have been called a “depression” if the term hadn’t long
since been abandoned as impolitic by economists). This curious
phenomenon of a vaunting inflation occurring *at the same time* as a
steep recession was simply *not supposed to happen* in the Keynesian
view of the world. Economists had always known that either the economy
is in a boom period, in which case prices are rising, *or else* the
economy is in a recession or depression marked by high unemployment, in
which case prices are falling. In the boom, the Keynesian government was
supposed to “sop up excess purchasing power” by increasing taxes,
according to the Keynesian prescription—that is, it was supposed to take
spending out of the economy; in the recession, on the other hand, the
government was supposed to increase its spending and its deficits, in
order to pump spending into the economy. But if the economy should be in
an inflation *and* a recession with heavy unemployment *at the same
time*, what in the world was government supposed to do? How could it
step on the economic accelerator *and* brake at the same time?

As early as the recession of 1958, things had started to work
peculiarly; for the first time, in the midst of a recession, consumer
goods prices rose, if only slightly. It was a cloud no bigger than a
man’s hand, and it seemed to give Keynesians little to worry about.

Consumer prices, again, rose in the recession of 1966, but this was such
a mild recession that no one worried about that either. The sharp
inflation of the recession of 1969–1971, however, was a considerable
jolt. But it took the steep recession that began in the midst of the
double-digit inflation of 1973–1974 to throw the Keynesian economic
establishment into permanent disarray. It made them realize that not
only had fine-tuning failed, not only was the supposedly dead and buried
cycle still with us, but now the economy was in a state of chronic
inflation and getting worse—and it was also subject to continuing bouts
of recession: of inflationary recession, or “stagflation.” It was not
only a new phenomenon, it was one that could not be explained, that
could not even *exist,* in the theories of economic orthodoxy.

And the inflation appeared to be getting worse: approximately 1–2
percent per annum in the Eisenhower years, up to 3–4 percent during the
Kennedy era, to 5–6 percent in the Johnson administration, then up to
about 13 percent in 1973–1974, and then falling “back” to about 6
percent, but only under the hammer blows of a steep and prolonged
depression (approximately 1973–1976).

There are several things, then, which need almost desperately to be
explained: (1) Why the chronic and accelerating inflation? (2) Why an
inflation even during deep depressions? And while we are at it, it would
be important to explain, if we could, (3) Why the business cycle at all?
Why the seemingly unending round of boom and bust?

Fortunately, the answers to these questions are at hand, provided by the
tragically neglected “Austrian School” of economics and its theory of
the money and business cycle, developed in Austria by Ludwig von Mises
and his follower Friedrich A. Hayek and brought to the London School of
Economics by Hayek in the early 1930s. Actually, Hayek’s Austrian
business cycle theory swept the younger economists in Britain precisely
because it alone offered a satisfactory explanation of the Great
Depression of the 1930s. Such future Keynesian leaders as John R. Hicks,
Abba P. Lerner, Lionel Robbins, and Nicholas Kaldor in England, as well
as Alvin Hansen in the United States, had been Hayekians only a few
years earlier. Then, Keynes’s *General Theory* swept the boards after
1936 in a veritable “Keynesian Revolution,” which arrogantly proclaimed
that no one before it had presumed to offer any explanation whatever of
the business cycle or of the Great Depression. It should be emphasized
that the Keynesian theory did *not* win out by carefully debating and
refuting the Austrian position; on the contrary, as often happens in the
history of social science, Keynesianism simply became the new fashion,
and the Austrian theory was not refuted but only ignored and forgotten.

For four decades, the Austrian theory was kept alive, unwept, unhonored,
and unsung by most of the world of economics: only Mises (at NYU) and
Hayek (at Chicago) themselves and a few followers still clung to the
theory. Surely it is no accident that the current renaissance of
Austrian economics has coincided with the phenomenon of stagflation and
its consequent shattering of the Keynesian paradigm for all to see. In
1974 the first conference of Austrian School economists in decades was
held at Royalton College in Vermont. Later that year, the economics
profession was astounded by the Nobel Prize being awarded to Hayek.
Since then, there have been notable Austrian conferences at the
University of Hartford, at Windsor Castle in England, and at New York
University, with even Hicks and Lerner showing signs of at least
partially returning to their own long-neglected position. Regional
conferences have been held on the East Coast, on the West Coast, in the
Middle West, and in the Southwest. Books are being published in this
field, and, perhaps most important, a number of extremely able graduate
students and young professors devoted to Austrian economics have emerged
and will undoubtedly be contributing a great deal in the future.

## MONEY AND INFLATION [money-and-inflation]

What, then, does this resurgent Austrian theory have to say about our
problem?^[2](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn2)^ The first thing to point out is
that inflation is not ineluctably built into the economy, nor is it a
prerequisite for a growing and thriving world. During most of the
nineteenth century (apart from the years of the War of 1812 and the
Civil War), prices were falling, *and yet* the economy was growing and
industrializing. Falling prices put no damper whatsoever on business or
economic prosperity.

Thus, falling prices are apparently the *normal* functioning of a
growing market economy. So how is it that the very idea of steadily
falling prices is so counter to our experience that it seems a totally
unrealistic dream-world? Why, since World War II, have prices gone up
continuously, and even swiftly, in the United States and throughout the
world? Before that point, prices had gone up steeply during World War I
and World War II; in between, they fell slightly despite the great boom
of the 1920s, and then fell steeply during the Great Depression of the
1930s. In short, apart from wartime experiences, the idea of inflation
as a peacetime norm really arrived after World War II.

The favorite explanation of inflation is that greedy businessmen persist
in putting up prices in order to increase their profits. But surely the
quotient of business “greed” has not suddenly taken a great leap forward
since World War II. Weren’t businesses equally “greedy” in the
nineteenth century and up to 1941? So why was there no inflation trend
then? Moreover, if businessmen are so avaricious as to jack up prices 10
percent per year, why do they stop there? Why do they wait; why don’t
they raise prices by 50 percent, or double or triple them immediately?
*What holds them back?*

A similar flaw rebuts another favorite explanation of inflation: that
unions insist on higher wage rates, which in turn leads businessmen to
raise prices. Apart from the fact that inflation appeared as long ago as
ancient Rome and long before unions arrived on the scene, and apart from
the lack of evidence that union wages go up faster than nonunion or that
prices of unionized products rise faster than of nonunionized, a similar
question arises: Why don’t businesses raise their prices *anyway?* What
is it that permits them to raise prices by a certain amount, but *not*
by more? If unions are that powerful, and businesses that responsive,
why don’t wages and prices rise by 50 percent, or 100 percent, per year?
*What holds them back?*

A government-inspired TV propaganda campaign a few years ago got a bit
closer to the mark: consumers were blamed for inflation by being too
“piggy,” by eating and spending too much. We have here at least the
beginning of an explanation of what holds businesses or unions back from
demanding still higher prices: consumers won’t pay them. Coffee prices
zoomed upward a few years ago; a year or two later they fell sharply
because of consumer resistance—to some extent from a flashy consumer
“boycott”—but more importantly from a shift in consumer buying habits
away from coffee and toward lower-priced substitutes. So a limit on
consumer demand holds them hack.

But this pushes the problem one step backward. For if consumer demand,
as seems logical, is limited at any given time, how come it keeps going
up, year after year, and validating or permitting price and wage
increases? And if it can go up by 10 percent, what keeps it from going
up by 50 percent? In short, what enables consumer demand to keep going
up, year after year, and yet keeps it from going up any further?

To go any further in this detective hunt we must analyze the meaning of
the term “price.” What exactly *is* a price? The price of any given
quantity of a product is the amount of money the buyer must spend on it.
In short, if someone must spend seven dollars on ten loaves of bread,
then the “price” of those ten loaves is seven dollars, or, since we
usually express price per unit of product, the price of bread is 70
cents per loaf. So there are two sides to this exchange: the buyer with
money and the seller with bread. It should be clear that the interaction
of both sides brings about the ruling price in the market. In short, if
more bread comes onto the market, the price of bread will be bid down
(increased supply lowers the price); while, on the other hand, if the
bread buyers have more money in their wallets, the price of bread will
be bid higher (increased demand raises the price).

We have now found the crucial element that limits and holds back the
amount of consumer demand and hence the price: the amount of money in
the consumers’ possession. If the money in their pockets increases by 20
percent, then the limitation on their demand is relaxed by 20 percent,
and, other things remaining equal, prices will tend to rise by 20
percent as well. We have found the crucial factor: the stock or the
supply of money.

If we consider prices across-the-board for the entire economy, then the
crucial factor is the total stock or supply of money in the whole
economy. In fact, the importance of the money supply in analyzing
inflation may be seen in extending our treatment from the bread or
coffee market to the overall economy. For *all* prices are determined
inversely by the supply of the good and directly by the demand for it.
But the supplies of goods are, in general, going up year after year in
our still growing economy. So that, from the point of view of the supply
side of the equation, most prices should be *falling*, and we should
right now be experiencing a nineteenth-century-style steady fall in
prices (“deflation”). If chronic inflation were due to the supply
side—to activities by producers such as business firms or unions—then
the supply of goods overall would necessarily be falling, thereby
raising prices. But since the supply of goods is manifestly increasing,
the source of inflation must be the demand side—and the dominant factor
on the demand side, as we have indicated, is the total supply of money.

And, indeed, if we look at the world past and present, we find that the
money supply has been going up at a rapid pace. It rose in the
nineteenth century, too, but at a much slower pace, far slower than the
increase of goods and services; but, since World War II, the increase in
the money supply—both here and abroad—has been much faster than in the
supply of goods. Hence, inflation.

The crucial question then becomes who, or what, controls and determines
the money supply, and keeps increasing its amount, especially in recent
decades? To answer this question, we must first consider how money
arises to begin with in the market economy. For money first arises on
the market as individuals begin to choose one or several useful
commodities to act as a money: the best money-commodities are those that
are in high demand; that have a high value per unit-weight; that are
durable, so they can be stored a long time, mobile, so they can be moved
readily from one place to another, and easily recognizable; and that can
be readily divisible into small parts without losing their value. Over
the centuries, various markets and societies have chosen a large number
of commodities as money: from salt to sugar to cowrie shells to cattle
to tobacco down to cigarettes in POW camps during World War II. But over
all these centuries, two commodities have always won out in the
competitive race to become moneys when they have been available: gold
and silver.

Metals always circulate by their weight—a *ton* of iron, a *pound* of
copper, etc.—and their prices are reckoned in terms of these units of
weight. Gold and silver are no exception. Every one of the modern
currency units originated as units of weight of either gold or silver.
Thus, the British unit, the “pound sterling,” is so named because it
originally meant simply *one pound of silver*. (To see how the pound has
lost value in the centuries since, we should note that the pound
sterling is now worth two-fifths of an *ounce* of silver on the market.
This is the effect of British inflation—of the *debasement* of the value
of the pound.) The “dollar” was originally a Bohemian coin consisting of
an ounce of silver. Later on, the “dollar” came to be defined as
one-twentieth of an ounce of gold.

When a society or a country comes to adopt a certain commodity as a
money, and its unit of weight then becomes the unit of currency—the unit
of reckoning in everyday life—then that country is said to be on that
particular commodity “standard.” Since markets have universally found
gold or silver to be the best standards whenever they are available, the
natural course of these economies is to be on the gold or silver
standard. In that case, the supply of gold is determined by market
forces: by the technological conditions of supply, the prices of other
commodities, etc.

From the beginning of market adoption of gold and silver as money, the
State has been moving in to seize control of the money-supply function,
the function of determining and creating the supply of money in the
society. It should be obvious why the State should want to do so: this
would mean seizing control over the money supply from the market and
turning it over to a group of people in charge of the State apparatus.
Why they should want to do so is clear: here would be an alternative to
taxation which the victims of a tax always consider onerous.

For now the rulers of the State can simply create their own money and
spend it or lend it out to their favorite allies. None of this was easy
until the discovery of the art of printing; after that, the State could
contrive to change the definition of the “dollar,” the “pound,” the
“mark,” etc., from units of weight of gold or silver into simply the
*names* for pieces of paper printed by the central government. Then that
government could print them costlessly and virtually *ad lib*, and then
spend or lend them out to its heart’s content. It took centuries for
this complex movement to be completed, but now the stock and the
issuance of money is totally in the hands of every central government.
The consequences are increasingly visible all around us.

Consider what would happen if the government should approach one group
of people—say the Jones family—and say to them: “Here we give you the
absolute and unlimited power to print dollars, to determine the number
of dollars in circulation. And you will have an absolute monopoly power:
anyone else who presumes to use such power will be jailed for a long,
long time as an evil and subversive counterfeiter. We hope you use this
power wisely.” We can pretty well predict what the Jones family will do
with this newfound power. At first, it will use the power slowly and
carefully, to pay off its debts, perhaps buy itself a few particularly
desired items; but then, habituated to the heady wine of being able to
print their own currency, they will begin to use the power to the hilt,
to buy luxuries, reward their friends, etc. The result will be
continuing and even accelerated increases in the money supply, and
therefore continuing and accelerated inflation.

But this is precisely what governments—all governments—*have* done.
Except that instead of granting the monopoly power to counterfeit to the
Jones or other families, government has “granted” the power to *itself*.
Just as the State arrogates to itself a monopoly power over legalized
kidnapping and calls it *conscription*; just as it has acquired a
monopoly over legalized robbery and calls it *taxation;* so, too, it has
acquired the monopoly power to counterfeit and calls it increasing the
supply of dollars (or francs, marks, or whatever). Instead of a gold
standard, instead of a money that emerges from and whose supply is
determined by the free market, we are living under a fiat paper
standard. That is, the dollar, franc, etc., are simply pieces of paper
with such names stamped upon them, issued at will by the central
government—by the State apparatus.

Furthermore, since the interest of a counterfeiter is to print as much
money as he can get away with, so too will the State print as much money
as *it* can get away with, just as it will employ the power to tax in
the same way: to extract as much money as it can without raising too
many howls of protest.

Government control of money supply is inherently inflationary, then, for
the same reason that *any* system in which a group of people obtains
control over the printing of money is bound to be inflationary.

## THE FEDERAL RESERVE AND FRACTIONAL RESERVE BANKING [the-federal-reserve-and-fractional-reserve-banking]

Inflating by simply printing more money, however, is now considered
old-fashioned. For one thing, it is too *visible*; with a lot of
high-denomination bills floating around, the public might get the
troublesome idea that the cause of the unwelcome inflation is the
government’s printing of all the bills—and the government might be
stripped of that power. Instead, governments have come up with a much
more complex and sophisticated, and much less visible, means of doing
the same thing: of organizing increases in the money supply to give
themselves more money to spend and to subsidize favored political
groups. The idea was this: instead of stressing the printing of money,
retain the paper dollars or marks or francs as the basic money (the
“legal tender”), and then pyramid on top of that a mysterious and
invisible, but no less potent, “checkbook money,” or bank demand
deposits. The result is an inflationary engine, controlled by
government, which no one but bankers, economists, and government central
bankers understands—and designedly so.

First, it must be realized that the entire commercial banking system, in
the United States or elsewhere, is under the total control of the
central government—a control that the banks welcome, for it permits them
to create money. The banks are under the complete control of the central
bank—a government institution—a control stemming largely from the
central bank’s compulsory monopoly over the printing of money. In the
United States, the Federal Reserve System performs this central banking
function. The Federal Reserve (“the Fed”) then permits the commercial
banks to pyramid bank demand deposits (“checkbook money”) on top of
their own “reserves” (deposits at the Fed) by a multiple of
approximately 6:1. In other words, if bank reserves at the Fed increase
by \$1 billion, the banks can and do pyramid their deposits by \$6
billion—that is, the banks create \$6 billion worth of new money.

Why do bank demand deposits constitute the major part of the money
supply? Officially, they are not money or legal tender in the way that
Federal Reserve Notes are money. But they constitute a promise by a bank
that it will redeem its demand deposits in cash (Federal Reserve Notes)
anytime that the depositholder (the owner of the “checking account”) may
desire. The point, of course, is that the banks *don’t have* the money;
they cannot, since they owe six times their reserves, which are their
own checking account at the Fed. The public, however, is induced to
trust the banks by the penumbra of soundness and sanctity laid about
them by the Federal Reserve System. For the Fed can and does bail out
banks in trouble. If the public understood the process and descended in
a storm upon the banks demanding their money, the Fed, in a pinch, if it
wanted, could always *print* enough money to tide the banks over.

The Fed, then, controls the rate of monetary inflation by adjusting the
multiple (6:1) of bank money creation, or, more importantly, by
determining the total amount of bank reserves. In other words, if the
Fed wishes to increase the total money supply by \$6 billion, instead of
actually printing the \$6 billion, it will contrive to increase bank
reserves by \$1 billion, and then leave it up to the banks to create \$6
billion of new checkbook money. The public, meanwhile, is kept ignorant
of the process or of its significance.

How do the banks create new deposits? Simply by lending them out in the
process of creation. Suppose, for example, that the banks receive the
\$1 billion of new reserves; the banks will lend out \$6 billion and
create the new deposits in the course of making these new loans. In
short, when the commercial banks lend money to an individual, a business
firm, or the government, they are *not* relending existing money that
the public laboriously had saved and deposited in their vaults—as the
public usually believes. They lend out new demand deposits that they
create in the course of the loan—and they are limited only by the
“reserve requirements,” by the required maximum multiple of deposit to
reserves (e.g., 6:1). For, after all, they are not printing paper
dollars or digging up pieces of gold; they are simply issuing deposit or
“checkbook” claims upon themselves for cash—claims which they wouldn’t
have a prayer of honoring if the public as a whole should ever rise up
at once and demand such a settling of their accounts.

How, then, does the Fed contrive to determine (almost always, to
*increase*) the total reserves of the commercial banks? It can and does
*lend* reserves to the banks, and it does so at an artificially cheap
rate (the “rediscount rate”). But still, the banks do not like to be
heavily in debt to the Fed, and so the total loans outstanding from the
Fed to the banks is never very high. By far the most important route for
the Fed’s determining of total reserves is little known or understood by
the public: the method of “open market purchases.” What this simply
means is that the Federal Reserve Bank goes out into the open market and
buys an asset. Strictly, it doesn’t matter what kind of an asset the Fed
buys. It could, for example, be a pocket calculator for \$20. Suppose
that the Fed buys a pocket calculator from XYZ Electronics for \$20. The
Fed acquires a calculator; but the important point for our purposes is
that XYZ Electronics acquires a check for \$20 from the Federal Reserve
Bank. Now, the Fed is not open to checking accounts from private
citizens, only from banks and the federal government itself. XYZ
Electronics, therefore, can only do one thing with its twenty-dollar
check: deposit it at its own bank, say the Acme Bank. At this point,
another transaction takes place: XYZ gets an increase of \$20 in its
checking account, in its “demand deposits.” In return, Acme Bank gets a
check, made over to itself, from the Federal Reserve Bank.

Now, the first thing that has happened is that XYZ’s money stock has
gone up by \$20—its newly increased account at the Acme Bank—and nobody
else’s money stock has changed at all. So, at the end of this initial
phase—phase I—the money supply has increased by \$20, the same amount as
the Fed’s purchase of an asset. If one asks, where did the Fed get the
\$20 to buy the calculator, then the answer is: it created the \$20 *out
of thin air* by simply writing out a check upon itself. No one, neither
the Fed nor anyone else, *had* the \$20 before it was created in the
process of the Fed’s expenditure.

But this is not all. For now the Acme Bank, to its delight, finds it has
a check on the Federal Reserve. It rushes to the Fed, deposits it, and
acquires an increase of \$20 in its reserves, that is, in its “demand
deposits with the Fed.” Now that the banking system has an increase in
\$20, it can and does expand credit, that is, create more demand
deposits in the form of loans to business (or to consumers or
government), until the total increase in checkbook money is \$120. At
the end of phase II, then, we have an increase of \$20 in bank reserves
generated by Fed purchase of a calculator for that amount, an increase
in \$120 in bank demand deposits, and an increase of \$100 in bank loans
to business or others. The total money supply has increased by \$120, of
which \$100 was created by the banks in the course of lending out
checkbook money to business, and \$20 was created by the Fed in the
course of buying the calculator.

In practice, of course, the Fed does not spend much of its time buying
haphazard assets. Its purchases of assets are so huge in order to
inflate the economy that it must settle on a regular, highly liquid
asset. In practice, this means purchases of U.S. government bonds and
other U.S. government securities. The U.S. government bond market is
huge and highly liquid, and the Fed does not have to get into the
political conflicts that would be involved in figuring out which private
stocks or bonds to purchase. For the government, this process also has
the happy consequence of helping to prop up the government security
market, and keep up the price of government bonds.

Suppose, however, that some bank, perhaps under the pressure of its
depositors, might have to cash in some of its checking account reserves
in order to acquire hard currency. What would happen to the Fed then,
since its checks had created new bank reserves out of thin air? Wouldn’t
it be forced to go bankrupt or the equivalent? No, because the Fed has a
monopoly on the printing of cash, and it could—and would—simply redeem
its demand deposit by printing whatever Federal Reserve Notes are
needed. In short, if a bank came to the Fed and demanded \$20 in cash
for its reserve—or, indeed, if it demanded \$20 million—all the Fed
would have to do is print that amount and pay it out. As we can see,
being able to print its own money places the Fed in a uniquely enviable
position.

So here we have, at long last, the key to the mystery of the modern
inflationary process. It is a process of continually expanding the money
supply through continuing Fed purchases of government securities on the
open market. Let the Fed wish to increase the money supply by \$6
billion, and it will purchase government securities on the open market
to a total of \$1 billion (if the money multiplier of demand
deposits/reserves is 6:1) and the goal will be speedily accomplished. In
fact, week after week, even as these lines are being read, the Fed goes
into the open market in New York and purchases whatever amount of
government bonds it has decided upon, and thereby helps decide upon the
amount of monetary inflation.

The monetary history of this century has been one of repeated loosening
of restraints on the State’s propensity to inflate, the removal of one
check after another until now the government is able to inflate the
money supply, and therefore prices, at will. In 1913, the Federal
Reserve System was created to enable this sophisticated pyramiding
process to take place. The new system permitted a large expansion of the
money supply, and of inflation to pay for war expenditures in World War
I. In 1933, another fateful step was taken: the United States government
took the country off the gold standard, that is, dollars, while still
legally defined in terms of a weight of gold, were no longer redeemable
in gold. In short, before 1933, there was an important shackle upon the
Fed’s ability to inflate and expand the money supply: Federal Reserve
Notes themselves were payable in the equivalent weight of gold.

There is, of course, a crucial difference between gold and Federal
Reserve Notes. The government cannot create new gold at will. Gold has
to be dug, in a costly process, out of the ground. But Federal Reserve
Notes can be issued at will, at virtually zero cost in resources. In
1933, the United States government removed the gold restraint on its
inflationary potential by shifting to fiat money: to making the paper
dollar itself the standard of money, with government the monopoly
supplier of dollars. It was going off the gold standard that paved the
way for the mighty U.S. money and price inflation during and after World
War II.

But there was still one fly in the inflationary ointment, one restraint
left on the U.S. government’s propensity for inflation. While the United
States had gone off gold domestically, it was still pledged to redeem
any paper dollars (and ultimately bank dollars) held by foreign
governments in gold should they desire to do so. We were, in short,
still on a restricted and aborted form of gold standard
*internationally*. Hence, as the United States inflated the money supply
and prices in the 1950s and 1960s, the dollars and dollar claims (in
paper and checkbook money) piled up in the hands of European
governments. After a great deal of economic finagling and political
arm-twisting to induce foreign governments not to exercise their right
to redeem dollars in gold, the United States, in August 1971, declared
national bankruptcy by repudiating its solemn contractual obligations
and “closing the gold window.” It is no coincidence that this tossing
off of the last vestige of gold restraint upon the governments of the
world was followed by the double-digit inflation of 1973–1974, and by
similar inflation in the rest of the world.

We have now explained the chronic and worsening inflation in the
contemporary world and in the United States: the unfortunate product of
a continuing shift in this century from gold to government-issued paper
as the standard money, and of the development of central banking and the
pyramiding of checkbook money on top of inflated paper currency. Both
interrelated developments amount to one thing: the seizure of control
over the money supply by government.

If we have explained the problem of inflation, we have not yet examined
the problem of the business cycle, of recessions, and of inflationary
recession or stagflation. Why the business cycle, and why the new
mysterious phenomenon of stagflation?

## BANK CREDIT AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE [bank-credit-and-the-business-cycle]

The business cycle arrived in the Western world in the latter part of
the eighteenth century. It was a curious phenomenon, because there
seemed to be no reason for it, and indeed it had not existed before. The
business cycle consisted of a regularly recurring (though not strictly
periodical) series of booms and busts, of inflationary periods marked by
increased business activity, higher employment, and higher prices
followed sharply by recessions or depressions marked by declining
business activity, higher unemployment, and price declines; and then,
after a term of such recession, recovery takes place and the boom phase
begins again.

*A priori*, there is no reason to expect this sort of cyclical pattern
of economic activity. There will be cyclical waves in specific types of
activity, of course; thus, the cycle of the seven-year locust will cause
a seven-year cycle in locust-fighting activity, in the production of
antilocust sprays and equipment, etc. But there is no reason to expect
boom-bust cycles in the overall economy. In fact, there is reason to
expect just the opposite; for usually the free market works smoothly and
efficiently, and especially with no massive cluster of error such as
becomes evident when boom turns suddenly to bust and severe losses are
incurred. And indeed, before the late eighteenth century there were no
such overall cycles. Generally, business went along smoothly and evenly
until a sudden interruption occurred: a wheat famine would cause a
collapse in an agricultural country; the king would seize most of the
money in the hands of financiers, causing a sudden depression; a war
would disrupt trading patterns. In each of these cases, there was a
specific blow to trade brought about by an easily identifiable, one-shot
cause, with no need to search further for explanation.

So why the new phenomenon of the business cycle? It was seen that the
cycle occurred in the most economically advanced areas of each country:
in the port cities, in the areas engaged in trade with the most advanced
world centers of production and activity. Two different and vitally
important phenomena began to emerge on a significant scale in Western
Europe during this period, precisely in the most advanced centers of
production and trade: industrialization and commercial banking. The
commercial banking was the same sort of “fractional reserve” banking we
have analyzed above, with London the site of the world’s first central
bank, the Bank of England, which originated at the turn of the
eighteenth century. By the nineteenth century, in the new discipline of
economics and among financial writers and commentators, two types of
theories began to emerge in an attempt to explain the new and unwelcome
phenomenon: those focussing the blame on the existence of industry, and
those centering upon the banking system. The former, in sum, saw the
responsibility for the business cycle to lie deep within the free-market
economy—and it was easy for such economists to call either for the
abolition of the market (e.g., Karl Marx) or for its drastic control and
regulation by the government in order to alleviate the cycle (e.g., Lord
Keynes). On the other hand, those economists who saw the fault to lie in
the fractional reserve banking system placed the blame outside the
market economy and onto an area—money and banking—which even English
classical liberalism had never taken away from tight government control.
Even in the nineteenth century, then, blaming the banks meant
essentially blaming government for the boom-bust cycle.

We cannot go into details here on the numerous fallacies of the schools
of thought that blame the market economy for the cycles; suffice it to
say that these theories cannot explain the rise in prices in the boom or
the fall in the recession, or the massive cluster of error that emerges
suddenly in the form of severe losses when the boom turns to bust.

The first economists to develop a cycle theory centering on the money
and banking system were the early nineteenth-century English classical
economist David Ricardo and his followers, who developed the “monetary
theory” of the business cycle.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap09_fn3)^ The
Ricardian theory went somewhat as follows: the fractional-reserve banks,
spurred and controlled by the government and its central bank, expand
credit. As credit is expanded and pyramided on top of paper money and
gold, the money supply (in the form of bank deposits or, in that
historical period, bank notes) expands. The expansion of the money
supply raises prices and sets the inflationary boom into motion. As the
boom continues, fueled by the pyramiding of bank notes and deposits on
top of gold, domestic prices also increase. But this means that domestic
prices will be higher, and still higher, than the prices of imported
goods, so that imports will increase and exports to foreign lands will
decline. A deficit in the balance of payments will emerge and widen, and
it will have to be paid for by gold flowing out of the inflating country
and into the hard-money countries. But as gold flows out, the expanding
money and banking pyramid will become increasingly top-heavy, and the
banks will find themselves in increasing danger of going bankrupt.
Finally, the government and banks will have to stop their expansion,
and, to save themselves, the banks will have to contract their bank
loans and checkbook money.

The sudden shift from bank credit expansion to contraction reverses the
economic picture and bust quickly follows boom. The banks must pull in
their horns, and businesses and economic activity suffer as the pressure
mounts for debt repayment and contraction. The fall in the supply of
money, in turn, leads to a general fall in prices (“deflation”). The
recession or depression phase has arrived. However, as the money supply
and prices fall, goods again become more competitive with foreign
products and the balance of payments reverses itself, with a surplus
replacing the deficit. Gold flows into the country, and, as bank notes
and deposits contract on top of an expanding gold base, the condition of
the banks becomes much sounder, and recovery gets under way.

The Ricardian theory had several notable features: It accounted for the
behavior of prices by focussing on changes in the supply of bank money
(which indeed always increased in booms and declined in busts). It also
accounted for the behavior of the balance of payments. And, moreover, it
linked the boom and the bust, so that the bust was seen to be the
consequence of the preceding boom. And not only the consequence, but the
salutary means of adjusting the economy to the unwise intervention that
created the inflationary boom.

In short, for the first time, the bust was seen to be neither a
visitation from hell nor a catastrophe generated by the inner workings
of the industrialized market economy. The Ricardians realized that the
major evil was the preceding inflationary boom caused by government
intervention in the money and banking system, and that the recession,
unwelcome though its symptoms may be, is really the necessary adjustment
process by which that interventionary boom gets washed out of the
economic system. The depression is the process by which the market
economy adjusts, throws off the excesses and distortions of the
inflationary boom, and reestablishes a sound economic condition. The
depression is the unpleasant but necessary reaction to the distortions
and excesses of the previous boom.

Why, then, does the business cycle recur? Why does the next
boom-and-bust cycle always begin? To answer that, we have to understand
the motivations of the banks and the government. The commercial banks
live and profit by expanding credit and by creating a new money supply;
so they are naturally inclined to do so, “to monetize credit,” if they
can. The government also wishes to inflate, both to expand its own
revenue (either by printing money or so that the banking system can
finance government deficits) and to subsidize favored economic and
political groups through a boom and cheap credit. So we know why the
initial boom began. The government and the banks had to retreat when
disaster threatened and the crisis point had arrived. But as gold flows
into the country, the condition of the banks becomes sounder. And when
the banks have pretty well recovered, they are then in the confident
position to resume their natural tendency of inflating the supply of
money and credit. And so the *next* boom proceeds on its way, sowing the
seeds for the *next* inevitable bust.

Thus, the Ricardian theory also explained the continuing recurrence of
the business cycle. But two things it did not explain. First, and most
important, it did not explain the massive cluster of error that
businessmen are suddenly seen to have made when the crisis hits and bust
follows boom. For businessmen are trained to be successful forecasters,
and it is not like them to make a sudden cluster of grave error that
forces them to experience widespread and severe losses. Second, another
important feature of every business cycle has been the fact that both
booms and busts have been much more severe in the “capital goods
industries” (the industries making machines, equipment, plant or
industrial raw materials) than in consumer goods industries. And the
Ricardian theory had no way of explaining this feature of the cycle.

The Austrian, or Misesian, theory of the business cycle built on the
Ricardian analysis and developed its own “monetary overinvestment” or,
more strictly, “monetary malinvestment” theory of the business cycle.
The Austrian theory was able to explain not only the phenomena
explicated by the Ricardians, but also the cluster of error and the
greater intensity of capital goods’ cycles. And, as we shall see, it is
the only one that can comprehend the modern phenomenon of stagflation.

Mises begins as did the Ricardians: government and its central bank
stimulate bank credit expansion by purchasing assets and thereby
increasing bank reserves. The banks proceed to expand credit and hence
the nation’s money supply in the form of checking deposits (private bank
notes having virtually disappeared). As with the Ricardians, Mises sees
that this expansion of bank money drives up prices and causes inflation.

But, as Mises pointed out, the Ricardians understated the unfortunate
consequences of bank credit inflation. For something even more sinister
is at work. Bank credit expansion not only raises prices, it also
artificially lowers the rate of interest, and thereby sends misleading
signals to businessmen, causing them to make unsound and uneconomic
investments.

For, on the free and unhampered market, the interest rate on loans is
determined solely by the “time preferences” of all the individuals that
make up the market economy. For the essence of any loan is that a
“present good” (money which can be used at present) is being exchanged
for a “future good” (an IOU which can be used at some point in the
future). Since people always prefer having money right now to the
present *prospect* of getting the same amount of money at some point in
the future, present goods always command a premium over future goods in
the market. That premium, or “agio,” is the interest rate, and its
height will vary according to the degree to which people prefer the
present to the future, i.e., the degree of their time preferences.

People’s time preferences also determine the extent to which people will
save and invest for future use, as compared to how much they will
consume now. If people’s time preferences should fall, i.e., if their
degree of preference for present over future declines, then people will
tend to consume less now and save and invest more; at the same time, and
for the same reason, the rate of interest, the rate of time-discount,
will also fall. Economic growth comes about largely as the result of
falling rates of time preference, which bring about an increase in the
proportion of saving and investment to consumption, as well as a falling
rate of interest.

But what happens when the rate of interest falls *not* because of
voluntary lower time preferences and higher savings on the part of the
public, but from government interference that promotes the expansion of
bank credit and bank money? For the new checkbook money created in the
course of bank loans to business will come onto the market as a supplier
of loans, and will therefore, at least initially, lower the rate of
interest. What happens, in other words, when the rate of interest falls
artificially, due to intervention, rather than naturally, from changes
in the valuations and preferences of the consuming public?

What happens is trouble. For businessmen, seeing the rate of interest
fall, will react as they always must to such a change of market signals:
they will invest more in capital goods. Investments, particularly in
lengthy and time-consuming projects, which *previously* looked
unprofitable, now seem profitable because of the fall in the interest
charge. In short, businessmen react as they would have if savings had
*genuinely* increased: they move to invest those supposed savings. They
expand their investment in durable equipment, in capital goods, in
industrial raw material, and in construction, as compared with their
direct production of consumer goods.

Thus, businesses happily borrow the newly expanded bank money that is
coming to them at cheaper rates; they use the money to invest in capital
goods, and eventually this money gets paid out in higher wages to
workers in the capital goods industries. The increased business demand
bids up labor costs, but businesses think they will be able to pay these
higher costs because they have been fooled by the government-and-bank
intervention in the loan market and by its vitally important tampering
with the interest-rate signal of the marketplace—the signal that
determines how many resources will be devoted to the production of
capital goods and how many to consumer goods.

Problems surface when the workers begin to spend the new bank money that
they have received in the form of higher wages. For the time preferences
of the public have not *really* gotten lower; the public doesn’t *want*
to save more than it has. So the workers set about to consume most of
their new income, in short, to reestablish their old consumer/saving
proportions. This means that they now redirect spending in the economy
back to the consumer goods industries, and that they don’t save and
invest enough to buy the newly produced machines, capital equipment,
industrial raw materials, etc. This lack of enough saving-and-investment
to buy all the new capital goods at expected and existing prices reveals
itself as a sudden, sharp depression in the capital goods industries.
For once the consumers reestablish their desired consumption/investment
proportions, it is thus revealed that business had invested too much in
capital goods (hence the term “monetary overinvestment theory”), and had
also underinvested in consumer goods. Business had been seduced by the
governmental tampering and artificial lowering of the rate of interest
and acted as if more savings were available to invest than were really
there. As soon as the new bank money filtered through the system and the
consumers reestablish their old time-preference proportions, it became
clear that there were not enough savings to buy all the producers’
goods, and that business had misinvested the limited savings available
(“monetary malinvestment theory”). Business had overinvested in capital
goods and underinvested in consumer goods.

The inflationary boom thus leads to distortions of the pricing and
production system. Prices of labor, raw materials, and machines in the
capital goods industries are bid up too high during the boom to be
profitable once the consumers are able to reassert their old
consumption/investment preferences. The “depression” is thus seen—even
more than in the Ricardian theory—as the necessary and healthy period in
which the market economy sloughs off and liquidates the unsound,
uneconomic investments of the boom, and reestablishes those proportions
between consumption and investment that are truly desired by the
consumers. The depression is the painful but necessary process by which
the free market rids itself of the excesses and errors of the boom and
reestablishes the market economy in its function of efficient service to
the mass of consumers. Since the prices of factors of production (land,
labor, machines, raw materials) have been bid too high in the capital
goods industries during the boom, this means that these prices must be
allowed to fall in the recession until proper market proportions of
prices and production are restored.

Put another way, the inflationary boom will not only increase prices in
general, it will also distort relative prices, will distort relations of
one type of price to another. In brief, inflationary credit expansion
will raise all prices; but prices and wages in the capital goods
industries will go up faster than the prices of consumer goods
industries. In short, the boom will be more intense in the capital goods
than in the consumer goods industries. On the other hand, the essence of
the depression adjustment period will be to lower prices and wages in
the capital goods industries relative to consumer goods, in order to
induce resources to move back from the swollen capital goods to the
deprived consumer goods industries. All prices will fall because of the
contraction of bank credit, but prices and wages in capital goods will
fall more sharply than in consumer goods. In short, both the boom and
the bust will be more intense in the capital than in the consumer goods
industries. Hence, we have explained the greater intensity of business
cycles in the former type of industry.

There seems to be a flaw in the theory, however; for, since workers
receive the increased money in the form of higher wages fairly rapidly,
and then begin to reassert their desired consumer/investment
proportions, how is it that booms go on for years without facing
retribution: without having their unsound investments revealed or their
errors caused by bank tampering with market signals made evident? In
short, why does it take so long for the depression adjustment process to
begin its work? The answer is that the booms would indeed be very
short-lived (say, a few months) *if* the bank credit expansion and the
subsequent pushing of interest rates below the free-market level were
just a one-shot affair. But the crucial point is that the credit
expansion is *not* one shot. It proceeds on and on, never giving the
consumers the chance to reestablish their preferred proportions of
consumption and saving, never allowing the rise in cost in the capital
goods industries to catch up to the inflationary rise in prices. Like
the repeated doping of a horse, the boom is kept on its way and ahead of
its inevitable comeuppance by repeated and accelerating doses of the
stimulant of bank credit. It is only when bank credit expansion must
finally stop or sharply slow down, either because the banks are getting
shaky or because the public is getting restive at the continuing
inflation, that retribution finally catches up with the boom. As soon as
credit expansion stops, the piper must be paid, and the inevitable
readjustments must liquidate the unsound over-investments of the boom
and redirect the economy more toward *consumer goods* production. And,
of course, the longer the boom is kept going, the greater the
malinvestments that must be liquidated, and the more harrowing the
readjustments that must be made.

Thus, the Austrian theory accounts for the massive cluster of error
(overinvestments in capital goods industries suddenly revealed as such
by the stopping of the artificial stimulant of credit expansion) and for
the greater intensity of boom and bust in the capital goods than in the
consumer goods industries. Its explanation for the recurrence, for the
inauguration of the next boom, is similar to the Ricardian; once the
liquidations and bankruptcies are undergone, and the price and
production adjustments completed, the economy and the banks begin to
recover, and the banks can set themselves to return to their natural and
desired course of credit expansion.

What of the Austrian explanation—the only proferred explanation—of
stagflation? How is it that, in recent recessions, prices continue to go
up? We must amend this first by pointing out that it is particularly
consumer goods prices that continue to rise during recessions, and that
confound the public by giving them the worst of both worlds at the same
time: high unemployment and increases in the cost of living. Thus,
during the most recent 1974–1976 depression, consumer goods prices rose
rapidly, but wholesale prices remained level, while industrial raw
material prices fell rapidly and substantially. So how is it that the
cost of living continues to rise in current recessions?

Let us go back and examine what happened to prices in the “classic,” or
old-fashioned boom-bust cycle (pre-World War II vintage), in the booms
the money supply went up, prices in general therefore went up, but the
prices of capital goods rose by *more* than consumer goods, drawing
resources out of consumer and into capital goods industries. In short,
abstracting from general price increases, *relative to each other,*
capital goods prices rose and consumer prices *fell* in the boom. What
happened in the bust? The opposite situation: the money supply went
down, prices in general therefore fell, but the prices of capital goods
fell by *more* than consumer goods, drawing resources back out of
capital goods into consumer goods industries. In short, abstracting from
general price declines, *relative to each other*, capital goods prices
*fell* and consumer prices *rose* during the bust.

The Austrian point is that this scenario in relative prices in boom and
bust is *still* taking place unchanged. During the booms, capital goods
prices still rise and consumer goods prices still fall relative to each
other, and vice versa during the recession. The difference is that a new
monetary world has arrived, as we have indicated earlier in this
chapter. For now that the gold standard has been eliminated, the Fed can
and does increase the money supply *all the time*, whether it be boom or
recession. There hasn’t been a contraction of the money supply since the
early 1930s, and there is not likely to be another in the foreseeable
future. So now that the money supply *always* increases, prices in
general are *always* going up, sometimes more slowly, sometimes more
rapidly.

In short, in the classic recession, consumer goods prices were always
going up relative to capital goods. Thus, if consumer goods prices fell
by 10 percent in a particular recession, and capital goods prices fell
by 30 percent, consumer prices were *rising* substantially in relative
terms. But, from the point of view of the consumer, the fall in the cost
of living was highly welcome, and indeed was the blessed sugarcoating on
the pill of recession or depression. Even in the Great Depression of the
1930s, with very high rates of unemployment, the 75–80 percent of the
labor force still employed enjoyed bargain prices for their consumer
goods.

But now, with Keynesian fine-tuning at work, the sugarcoating has been
removed from the pill. Now that the supply of money—and hence general
prices—is *never* allowed to fall, the rise in relative consumer goods
prices during a recession will hit the consumer as a visible rise in
nominal prices as well. His cost of living now goes up in a depression,
and so he reaps the worst of both worlds; in the classical business
cycle, before the rule of Keynes and the Council of Economic Advisors,
he at least had to suffer only one calamity at a time.

What then are the policy conclusions that arise rapidly and easily from
the Austrian analysis of the business cycle? They are the precise
opposite from those of the Keynesian establishment. For, since the virus
of distortion of production and prices stems from inflationary bank
credit expansion, the Austrian prescription for the business cycle will
be: First, if we are in a boom period, the government and its banks must
cease inflating immediately. It is true that this cessation of
artificial stimulant will inevitably bring the inflationary boom to an
end, and will inaugurate the inevitable recession or depression. But the
longer the government delays this process, the harsher the necessary
readjustments will have to be. For the sooner the depression
readjustment is gotten over with, the better. This also means that the
government must never try to delay the depression process; the
depression must be allowed to work itself out as quickly as possible, so
that real recovery can begin. This means, too, that the government must
particularly avoid any of the interventions so dear to Keynesian hearts.
It must never try to prop up unsound business situations; it must never
bail out or lend money to business firms in trouble. For doing so will
simply prolong the agony and convert a sharp and quick depression phase
into a lingering and chronic disease. The government must never try to
prop up wage rates or prices, especially in the capital goods
industries; doing so will prolong and delay indefinitely the completion
of the depression adjustment process. It will also cause indefinite and
prolonged depression and mass unemployment in the vital capital goods
industries. The government must not try to inflate again in order to get
out of the depression. For even if this reinflation succeeds (which is
by no means assured), it will only sow greater trouble and more
prolonged and renewed depression later on. The government must do
nothing to encourage consumption, and it must not increase its own
expenditures, for this will further increase the social
consumption/investment ratio—when the only thing that could speed up the
adjustment process is to lower the consumption/savings ratio so that
more of the currently unsound investments will become validated and
become economic. The only way the government can aid in this process is
to lower its own budget, which will increase the ratio of investment to
consumption in the economy (since government spending may be regarded as
consumption spending for bureaucrats and politicians).

Thus, what the government should do, according to the Austrian analysis
of the depression and the business cycle, is absolutely nothing. It
should stop its *own* inflating, and then it should maintain a strict
hands-off, laissez-faire policy. Anything it does will delay and
obstruct the adjustment processes of the market; the less it does, the
more rapidly will the market adjustment process do its work and sound
economic recovery ensue.

The Austrian prescription for a depression is thus the diametric
opposite of the Keynesian: it is for the government to keep absolute
hands off the economy, and to confine itself to stopping its own
inflation, and to cutting its own budget.

It should be clear that the Austrian analysis of the business cycle
meshes handsomely with the libertarian outlook toward government and a
free economy. Since the State would always like to inflate and to
interfere in the economy, a libertarian prescription would stress the
importance of absolute separation of money and banking from the State.
This would involve, at the very least, the abolition of the Federal
Reserve System and the return to a commodity money (e.g., gold or
silver) so that the money-unit would once again be a unit of weight of a
market-produced commodity rather than the name of a piece of paper
printed by the State’s counterfeiting apparatus.

# 10 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, I: GOVERNMENT IN BUSINESS [17-chap10.html#page241]

People tend to fall into habits and into unquestioned ruts, especially
in the field of government. On the market, in society in general, we
expect and accommodate rapidly to change, to the unending marvels and
improvements of our civilization. New products, new life styles, new
ideas are often embraced eagerly. But in the area of government we
follow blindly in the path of centuries, content to believe that
whatever has been must be right. In particular, government, in the
United States and elsewhere, for centuries and seemingly from time
immemorial has been supplying us with certain essential and necessary
services, services which nearly everyone concedes are important: defense
(including army, police, judicial, and legal), firefighting, streets and
roads, water, sewage and garbage disposal, postal service, etc. So
identified has the State become in the public mind with the provision of
these services that an attack on State financing *appears* to many
people as an attack on the service itself. Thus if one maintains that
the State should not supply court services, and that private enterprise
on the market could supply such service more efficiently as well as more
morally, people tend to think of this as denying the importance of
courts themselves.

The libertarian who wants to replace government by private enterprises
in the above areas is thus treated in the same way as he would be if the
government had, for various reasons, been supplying shoes as a
tax-financed monopoly from time immemorial. If the government and only
the government had had a monopoly of the shoe manufacturing and
retailing business, how would most of the public treat the libertarian
who now came along to advocate that the government get out of the shoe
business and throw it open to private enterprise? He would undoubtedly
be treated as follows: people would cry, “How could you? You are opposed
to the public, and to poor people, wearing shoes! And *who* would supply
shoes to the public if the government got out of the business? Tell us
that! Be constructive! It’s easy to be negative and smart-alecky about
government; but tell us *who* would supply shoes? Which people? How many
shoe stores would be available in each city and town? How would the shoe
firms be capitalized? How many brands would there be? What material
would they use? What lasts? What would be the pricing arrangements for
shoes? Wouldn’t regulation of the shoe industry be needed to see to it
that the product is sound? And who would supply the poor with shoes?
Suppose a poor person didn’t have the money to buy a pair?”

These questions, ridiculous as they seem to be and are with regard to
the shoe business, are just as absurd when applied to the libertarian
who advocates a free market in fire, police, postal service, or any
other government operation. The point is that the advocate of a free
market in *anything* cannot provide a “constructive” blueprint of such a
market in advance. The essence and the glory of the free market is that
individual firms and businesses, competing on the market, provide an
ever-changing orchestration of efficient and progressive goods and
services: continually improving products and markets, advancing
technology, cutting costs, and meeting changing consumer demands as
swiftly and as efficiently as possible. The libertarian economist can
try to offer a few guidelines on how markets *might* develop where they
are now prevented or restricted from developing; but he can do little
more than point the way toward freedom, to call for government to get
out of the way of the productive and ever-inventive energies of the
public as expressed in voluntary market activity. No one can predict the
number of firms, the size of each firm, the pricing policies, etc., of
any future market in any service or commodity. We just know—by economic
theory and by historical insight—that such a free market will do the job
infinitely better than the compulsory monopoly of bureaucratic
government.

How will the poor pay for defense, fire protection, postal service,
etc., can basically be answered by the counter-question: how do the poor
pay for *anything* they now obtain on the market? The difference is that
we know that the free private market will supply these goods and
services far more cheaply, in greater abundance, and of far higher
quality than monopoly government does today. Everyone in society would
benefit, and *especially* the poor. And we also know that the mammoth
tax burden to finance these and other activities would be lifted from
the shoulders of everyone in society, including the poor.

We have seen above that the universally acknowledged pressing problems
of our society are all wrapped up in government operations. We have also
seen that the enormous social conflicts entwined in the public school
system would all disappear when each group of parents was allowed to
finance and support whichever education it preferred for their children.
The grave inefficiencies and the intense conflicts are all inherent in
government operation. If the government, for example, provides monopoly
services (e.g., in education or in water supply), then whichever
decisions the government makes are coercively imposed on the hapless
minority—whether it is a question of educational policies for the
schools (integration or segregation, progressive or traditional,
religious or secular, etc.), or even for the kind of water to be sold
(e.g., fluoridated or unfluoridated). It should be clear that no such
fierce arguments occur where each group of consumers can purchase the
goods or services they demand. There are no battles between consumers,
for example, over what kind of newspapers should be printed, churches
established, books printed, records marketed, or automobiles
manufactured. Whatever is produced on the market reflects the diversity
as well as the strength of consumer demand.

On the free market, in short, the consumer is king, and any business
firm that wants to make profits and avoid losses tries its best to serve
the consumer as efficiently and at as low a cost as possible. In a
government operation, in contrast, everything changes. *Inherent in all
government operation is a grave and fatal split between service and
payment*, between the providing of a service and the payment for
receiving it. The government bureau does not get its income as does the
private firm, from serving the consumer well or from consumer purchases
of its products exceeding its costs of operation. No, the government
bureau acquires its income from mulcting the long-suffering taxpayer.
Its operations therefore become inefficient, and costs zoom, since
government bureaus need not worry about losses or bankruptcy; they can
make up their losses by additional extractions from the public till.
Furthermore, the consumer, instead of being courted and wooed for his
favor, becomes a mere annoyance to the government, someone who is
“wasting” the *government’s* scarce resources. In government operations,
the consumer is treated like an unwelcome intruder, an interference in
the quiet enjoyment by the bureaucrat of his steady income.

Thus, if consumer demand should increase for the goods or services of
any private business, the private firm is delighted; it woos and
welcomes the new business and expands its operations eagerly to fill the
new orders. Government, in contrast, generally meets this situation by
sourly urging or even ordering consumers to “buy” less, and allows
shortages to develop, along with deterioration in the quality of its
service. Thus, the increased consumer use of government streets in the
cities is met by aggravated traffic congestion and by continuing
denunciations and threats against people who drive their own cars. The
New York City administration, for example, is continually threatening to
outlaw the use of private cars in Manhattan, where congestion has been
most troublesome. It is only government, of course, that would ever
think of bludgeoning consumers in this way; it is only government that
has the audacity to “solve” traffic congestion by forcing private cars
(or trucks or taxis or whatever) off the road. According to this
principle, of course, the “ideal” solution to traffic congestion is
simply to outlaw all vehicles!

But this sort of attitude toward the consumer is not confined to traffic
on the streets. New York City, for example, has suffered periodically
from a water “shortage.” Here is a situation where, for many years, the
city government has had a compulsory monopoly of the supply of water to
its citizens. Failing to supply enough water, and failing to price that
water in such a way as to clear the market, to equate supply and demand
(which private enterprise does automatically), New York’s response to
water shortages has always been to blame *not* itself, but the consumer,
whose sin has been to use “too much” water. The city administration
could only react by outlawing the sprinkling of lawns, restricting use
of water, and demanding that people drink less water. In this way,
government transfers its own failings to the scapegoat user, who is
threatened and bludgeoned instead of being served well and efficiently.

There has been similar response by government to the ever-accelerating
crime problem in New York City. Instead of providing efficient police
protection, the city’s reaction has been to force the innocent citizen
to stay out of crime-prone areas. Thus, after Central Park in Manhattan
became a notorious center for muggings and other crime in the night
hours, New York City’s “solution” to the problem was to impose a curfew,
banning use of the park in those hours. In short, if an innocent citizen
wants to stay in Central Park at night, it is he who is arrested for
disobeying the curfew; it is, of course, easier to arrest him than to
rid the park of crime.

In short, while the long-held motto of private enterprise is that “the
customer is always right,” the implicit maxim of government operation is
that the customer is always to be blamed.

Of course, the political bureaucrats have a standard response to the
mounting complaints of poor and inefficient service: “The taxpayers must
give us more money!” It is not enough that the “public sector,” and its
corollary in taxation, has been growing far more rapidly in this century
than the national income. It is not enough that the flaws and headaches
of government operation have multiplied along with the increased burden
of the government budget. We are supposed to pour still more money down
the governmental rathole!

The proper counter-argument to the political demand for more tax money
is the question: “How is it that private enterprise doesn’t have these
problems?” How is it that hi-fi manufacturers or photocopy companies or
computer firms or whatever do not have trouble finding capital to expand
their output? Why don’t *they* issue manifestos denouncing the investing
public for not providing *them* with more money to serve consumer needs?
The answer is that consumers pay for the hi-fi sets or the photocopy
machines or the computers, and that investors, as a result, know that
they can make money by investing in those businesses. On the private
market, firms that successfully serve the public find it easy to obtain
capital for expansion; inefficient, unsuccessful firms do not, and
eventually have to go out of business. But there is no profit-and-loss
mechanism in *government* to induce investment in efficient operations
and to penalize and drive the inefficient or obsolete ones out of
business. There are no profits or losses in government operations
inducing either expansion or contraction of operations. In government,
then, no one truly “invests,” and no one can insure that successful
operations will expand and unsuccessful ones disappear. In contrast,
government must raise its “capital” by literally conscripting it through
the coercive mechanism of taxation.

Many people, including some government officials, think that these
problems could be solved if only “government were run like a business.”
The government then sets up a pseudocorporate monopoly, run by
government, which is supposed to set affairs on a “business basis.” This
has been done, for example, in the case of the Post Office—now the U.S.
“Postal Service”—and in the case of the ever-crumbling and decaying New
York City Transit Authority.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap10_fn1)^ The
“corporations” are enjoined to end their chronic deficits and are
allowed to float bonds on the bond market. It is true that direct users
then would be taking some of the burden off the mass of taxpayers, which
include users and nonusers alike. But there are fatal flaws inherent in
any government operation which cannot be avoided by this pseudobusiness
device. In the first place, government service is always a monopoly or
semimonopoly. Often, as in the case of the Postal Service or the Transit
Authority, it is a compulsory monopoly—all or nearly all private
competition is outlawed. The monopoly means that government service will
be far more costly, higher priced, and poorer in quality than would be
the case in the free market. Private enterprise gains a profit by
cutting costs as much as it can. Government, which cannot go bankrupt or
suffer losses in any case, need not cut costs; protected from
competition as well as losses, it need only cut its service or simply
raise prices. A second fatal flaw is that, try as it may, a government
corporation can *never* be run as a business because its *capital*
continues to be conscripted from the taxpayer. There is no way of
avoiding that; the fact that the government corporation may raise bonds
on the market still rests on the ultimate power of taxation to redeem
these bonds.

Finally, there is another critical problem inherent in any government
operation of a business. One of the reasons that private firms are
models of efficiency is because the free market establishes prices which
permit them to *calculate*, to figure out what their costs are and
therefore what they must do to make profits and avoid losses. It is
through this price system, as well as through the motivation to increase
profits and avoid losses, that goods and services are properly allocated
in the market among all the intricate branches and areas of production
that make up the modern industrial “capitalist” economy. It is economic
calculation that makes this marvel possible; in contrast, central
planning, such as is attempted under socialism, is deprived of accurate
pricing, and therefore *cannot* calculate costs and prices. This is the
major reason that central socialist planning has increasingly proved to
be a failure as the communist countries have become industrialized. It
is because central planning cannot determine prices and costs with any
accuracy that the communist countries of Eastern 5/18/2010Europe have
been moving rapidly away from socialist planning and toward a
free-market economy.

If central planning, then, thrusts the economy into hopeless
calculational chaos, and into irrational allocations and production
operations, the advance of government activities inexorably introduces
ever greater *islands* of such chaos into the economy, and makes
calculation of costs and rational allocation of production resources
more and more difficult. As government operations expand and the market
economy withers, the calculational chaos becomes more and more
disruptive and the economy increasingly unworkable.

The ultimate libertarian program may be summed up in one phrase: the
*abolition* of the public sector, the conversion of all operations and
services performed by the government into activities performed
voluntarily by the private-enterprise economy. Let us now turn from
general considerations of government as contrasted with private activity
to some of the major areas of government operation and how they could be
performed by the free-market economy.

# 11 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, II: STREETS AND ROADS [18-chap11.html#page249]

## PROTECTING THE STREETS [protecting-the-streets]

Abolition of the public sector means, of course, that *all* pieces of
land, all land areas, including streets and roads, would be owned
privately, by individuals, corporations, cooperatives, or any other
voluntary groupings of individuals and capital. The fact that all
streets and land areas would be private would by itself solve many of
the seemingly insoluble problems of private operation. What we need to
do is to reorient our thinking to consider a world in which all land
areas are privately owned.

Let us take, for example, police protection. How would police protection
be furnished in a totally private economy? *Part* of the answer becomes
evident if we consider a world of totally private land and street
ownership. Consider the Times Square area of New York City, a
notoriously crime-ridden area where there is little police protection
furnished by the city authorities. Every New Yorker knows, in fact, that
he lives and walks the streets, and not only Times Square, virtually in
a state of “anarchy,” dependent solely on the normal peacefulness and
good will of his fellow citizens. Police protection in New York is
minimal, a fact dramatically revealed in a recent week-long police
strike when, lo and behold!, crime in no way increased from its normal
state when the police are supposedly alert and on the job. At any rate,
suppose that the Times Square area, including the streets, was privately
owned, say by the “Times Square Merchants Association.” The merchants
would know full well, of course, that if crime was rampant in their
area, if muggings and holdups abounded, then their customers would fade
away and would patronize competing areas and neighborhoods. Hence, it
would be to the economic interest of the merchants’ association to
supply efficient and plentiful police protection, so that customers
would be attracted to, rather than repelled from, their neighborhood.
Private business, after all, is always trying to attract and keep its
customers. But what good would be served by attractive store displays
and packaging, pleasant lighting and courteous service, if the customers
may be robbed or assaulted if they walk through the area?

The merchants’ association, furthermore, would be induced, by their
drive for profits and for avoiding losses, to supply not only sufficient
police protection but also courteous and pleasant protection.
Governmental police have not only no incentive to be efficient or worry
about their “customers’” needs; they also live with the ever-present
temptation to wield their power of force in a brutal and coercive
manner. “Police brutality” is a well-known feature of the police system,
and it is held in check only by remote complaints of the harassed
citizenry. But if the private merchants’ police should yield to the
temptation of brutalizing the merchants’ customers, those customers will
quickly disappear and go elsewhere. Hence, the merchants’ association
will see to it that its police are courteous as well as plentiful.

Such efficient and high-quality police protection would prevail
throughout the land, throughout all the private streets and land areas.
Factories would guard their street areas, merchants their streets, and
road companies would provide safe and efficient police protection for
their toll roads and other privately owned roads. The same would be true
for residential neighborhoods. We can envision two possible types of
private street ownership in such neighborhoods. In one type, all the
landowners in a certain block might become the joint *owners* of that
block, let us say as the “85th St. Block Company.” This company would
then provide police protection, the costs being paid either by the
homeowners directly or out of tenants’ rent if the street includes
rental apartments. Again, homeowners will of course have a direct
interest in seeing that their block is safe, while landlords will try to
attract tenants by supplying safe streets in addition to the more usual
services such as heat, water, and janitorial service. To ask *why*
landlords should provide safe streets in the libertarian, fully private
society is just as silly as asking *now* why they should provide their
tenants with heat or hot water. The force of competition and of consumer
demand would make them supply such services. Furthermore, whether we are
considering homeowners or rental housing, in *either case* the capital
value of the land and the house will be a function of the safety of the
street as well as of the other well-known characteristics of the house
and the neighborhood. Safe and well-patrolled streets will raise the
value of the landowners’ land and houses in the same way as well-tended
houses do; crime-ridden streets will lower the value of the land and
houses as surely as dilapidated housing itself does. Since landowners
always prefer higher to lower market values for their property, there is
a built-in incentive to provide efficient, well-paved, and safe streets.

Another type of private street-ownership in residential areas might be
private street companies, which would own only the streets, not the
houses or buildings on them. The street companies would then charge
landowners for the service of maintaining, improving, and policing their
streets. Once again, safe, well-lit, and well-paved streets will induce
landowners and tenants to flock to those streets; unsafe, badly lit and
badly maintained streets will drive those owners and users away. A happy
and flourishing use of the streets by landlords and automobiles will
raise the profits and stock values of the street companies; an unhappy
and decaying regard for streets by their owners will drive the users
away and lower the profits and the stock values of the private street
companies. Hence, the street-owning companies will do their best to
provide efficient street service, including police protection, to secure
happy users; they will be driven to do this by their desire to make
profits and to increase the value of their capital, and by their equally
active desire not to suffer losses and erosion of their capital. It is
infinitely better to rely on the pursuit of economic interest by
landowners or street companies than to depend on the dubious “altruism”
of bureaucrats and government officials.

At this point in the discussion, someone is bound to raise the question:
If streets are owned by street companies, and granting that they
generally would aim to please their customers with maximum efficiency,
what if some kooky or tyrannical street owner should suddenly decide to
block access to his street to an adjoining homeowner? How could the
latter get in or out? Could he be blocked permanently, or be charged an
enormous amount to be allowed entrance or exit? The answer to this
question is the same as to a similar problem about land-ownership:
Suppose that everyone owning homes surrounding someone’s property would
suddenly not allow him to go in or out? The answer is that everyone, in
purchasing homes or street service in a libertarian society, would make
sure that the purchase or lease contract provides full access for
whatever term of years is specified. With this sort of “easement”
provided in advance by contract, no such sudden blockade would be
allowed, since it would be an invasion of the property right of the
landowner.

There is of course nothing new or startling in the *principle* of this
envisioned libertarian society. We are already familiar with the
energizing effects of inter-location and inter-transportation
competition. For example, when the private railroads were being built
throughout the nation in the nineteenth century, the railroads and their
competition provided a remarkable energizing force for developing their
respective areas. Each railroad tried its best to induce immigration and
economic development in its area in order to increase its profits, land
values, and value of its capital; and each hastened to do so, lest
people and markets leave their area and move to the ports, cities, and
lands served by competing railroads. The same principle would be at work
if all streets and roads were private as well. Similarly, we are already
familiar with police protection provided by private merchants and
organizations. *Within* their property, stores provide guards and
watchmen; banks provide guards; factories employ watchmen; shopping
centers retain guards, etc. The libertarian society would simply extend
this healthy and functioning system to the *streets* as well. It is
scarcely accidental that there are far more assaults and muggings on the
*streets* outside stores than in the stores themselves; this is because
the stores are supplied with watchful private guards while on the
streets we must all rely on the “anarchy” of government police
protection. Indeed, in various blocks of New York City there has already
arisen in recent years, in response to the galloping crime problem, the
hiring of private guards to patrol the blocks by voluntary contributions
of the landlords and homeowners on that block. Crime on these blocks has
already been substantially reduced. The problem is that these efforts
have been halting and inefficient because those streets are not *owned*
by the residents, and hence there is no effective mechanism for
gathering the capital to provide efficient protection on a permanent
basis. Furthermore, the patrolling street guards cannot legally be armed
because they are not on their owners’ property, and they cannot, as
store or other property owners can, challenge anyone acting in a
suspicious but not yet criminal manner. They cannot, in short, do the
things, financially or administratively, that *owners* can do with their
property.

Furthermore, police paid for by the landowners and residents of a block
or neighborhood would not only end police brutality against customers;
this system would end the current spectacle of police being considered
by many communities as alien “imperial” colonizers, there not to serve
but to oppress the community. In America today, for example, we have the
general rule in our cities of black areas patrolled by police hired by
central urban governments, governments that are perceived to be alien to
the black communities. Police supplied, controlled, and paid for by the
residents and landowners of the communities themselves would be a
completely different story; they would be supplying, and perceived to be
supplying, services to their customers rather than coercing them on
behalf of an alien authority.

A dramatic contrast of the merits of public vs. private protection is
provided by one block in Harlem. On West 135th Street between Seventh
and Eighth Avenues is the station house of the 82nd Precinct of the New
York City Police Department. Yet the august presence of the station
house did not prevent a rash of night robberies of various stores on the
block. Finally, in the winter of 1966, 15 merchants on the block banded
together to hire a guard to walk the block all night; the guard was
hired from the Leroy V. George protection company to provide the police
protection not forthcoming from their property
taxes.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn1)^

The most successful and best organized private police forces in American
history have been the railway police, maintained by many railroads to
prevent injury or theft to passengers or freight. The modern railway
police were founded at the end of World War I by the Protection Section
of the American Railway Association. So well did they function that by
1929 freight claim payments for robberies had declined by 93 percent.
Arrests by the railway police, who at the time of the major study of
their activities in the early 1930s totalled 10,000 men, resulted in a
far higher percentage of convictions than earned by police departments,
ranging from 83 percent to 97 percent. Railway police were armed, could
make normal arrests, and were portrayed by an unsympathetic
criminologist as having a widespread reputation for good character and
ability.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn2)^

## STREET RULES [18-chap11.html#page255]

One of the undoubted consequences of all land areas in the country being
owned by private individuals and companies would be a greater richness
and diversity of American neighborhoods. The character of the police
protection and the rules applied by the private police would depend on
the wishes of the landowners or street owners, the owners of the given
area. Thus, suspicious residential neighborhoods would insist that any
people or cars entering the area have a prior appointment with a
resident, or else be approved by a resident with a phone call from the
gate. In short, the same rules for street property would be applied as
are now often applied in private apartment buildings or family estates.
In other, more raffish areas, everyone would be permitted to enter at
will, and there might be varying degrees of surveillance in between.
Most probably commercial areas, anxious not to rebuff customers, would
be open to all. All this would give full scope to the desires and values
of the residents and owners of all the numerous areas in the country.

It might be charged that all this will allow freedom “to discriminate”
in housing or use of the streets. There is no question about that.
Fundamental to the libertarian creed is every man’s right to choose who
shall enter or use his own property, provided of course that the other
person is willing.

“Discrimination,” in the sense of choosing favorably or unfavorably in
accordance with whatever criteria a person may employ, is an integral
part of freedom of choice, and hence of a free society. But of course in
the free market any such discrimination is costly, and will have to be
paid for by the property owner concerned.

Suppose, for example, that someone in a free society is a landlord of a
house or a block of houses. He *could* simply charge the free market
rent and let it go at that. But then there are risks; he may choose to
discriminate against renting to couples with young children, figuring
that there is substantial risk of defacing his property. On the other
hand, he may well choose to charge extra rent to compensate for the
higher risk, so that the free-market rent for such families will tend to
be higher than otherwise. This, in fact, will happen in most cases on
the free market. But what of personal, rather than strictly economic,
“discrimination” by the landlord? Suppose, for example, that the
landlord is a great admirer of six-foot Swedish-Americans, and decides
to rent his apartments only to families of such a group. In the free
society it would be fully in his right to do so, but he would clearly
suffer a large monetary loss as a result. For this means that he would
have to turn away tenant after tenant in an endless quest for very tall
Swedish-Americans. While this may be considered an extreme example, the
effect is exactly the same, though differing in degree, for any sort of
personal discrimination in the marketplace. If, for example, the
landlord dislikes redheads and determines not to rent his apartments to
them, he will suffer losses, although not as severely as in the first
example.

In any case, anytime anyone practices such “discrimination” in the free
market, he must bear the costs, either of losing profits or of losing
services as a consumer. If a consumer decides to boycott goods sold by
people he does not like, whether the dislike is justified or not, he
then will go without goods or services which he otherwise would have
purchased.

All property owners, then, in a free society, would set down the rules
for use of, or admission to, their property. The more rigorous the rules
the fewer the people who will engage in such use, and the property owner
will then have to balance rigor of admission as against loss of income.
A landlord might “discriminate,” for example, by insisting, as George
Pullman did in his “company town” in Illinois in the late nineteenth
century, that all his tenants appear at all times dressed in jacket and
tie; he might do so, but it is doubtful that many tenants would elect to
move into or remain in such a building or development and the landlord
would suffer severe losses.

The principle that property is administered by its owners also provides
the rebuttal to a standard argument for government intervention in the
economy. The argument holds that “after all, the government sets down
traffic rules—red and green lights, driving on the right-hand side,
maximum speed limits, etc. Surely everyone must admit that traffic would
degenerate into chaos if not for such rules. Therefore, why should
government not intervene in the rest of the economy as well?” The
fallacy here is not that traffic should be regulated; of course such
rules are necessary. But the crucial point is that such rules will
always be laid down by whoever owns and therefore administers the roads.
Government has been laying down traffic rules because it is the
government that has always owned and therefore run the streets and
roads; in a libertarian society of private ownership the *private*
owners would lay down the rules for the use of their roads.

However, might not the traffic rules be “chaotic” in a purely free
society? Wouldn’t some owners designate red for “stop,” others green or
blue, etc.? Wouldn’t some roads be used on the right-hand side and
others on the left? Such questions are absurd. Obviously, it would be to
the interest of all road owners to have uniform rules in these matters,
so that road traffic could mesh smoothly and without difficulty. Any
maverick road owner who insisted on a left-hand drive or green for
“stop” instead of “go” would soon find himself with numerous accidents,
and the disappearance of customers and users. The private railroads in
nineteenth-century America faced similar problems and solved them
harmoniously and without difficulty. Railroads allowed each other’s cars
on their tracks; they inter-connected with each other for mutual
benefit; the gauges of the different railroads were adjusted to be
uniform; and uniform regional freight classifications were worked out
for 6,000 items. Furthermore, it was the railroads and not government
that took the initiative to consolidate the unruly and chaotic patchwork
of time zones that had existed previously. In order to have accurate
scheduling and timetables, the railroads *had* to consolidate; and in
1883 they agreed to consolidate the existing 54 time zones across the
country into the four which we have today. The New York financial paper,
the *Commercial and Financial Chronicle*, exclaimed that “the laws of
trade and the instinct for self-preservation effect reforms and
improvements that all the legislative bodies combined could not
accomplish.”^[3](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn3)^

## PRICING STREETS AND ROADS [pricing-streets-and-roads]

If, in contrast, we examine the performance of governmental streets and
highways in America, it is difficult to see how private ownership could
pile up a more inefficient or irrational record. It is now widely
recognized, for example, that federal and state governments, spurred by
the lobbying of automobile companies, oil companies, tire companies, and
construction contractors and unions, have indulged in a vast
over-expansion of highways. The highways grant gross subsidies to the
users and have played the major role in killing railroads as a viable
enterprise. Thus, trucks can operate on a right-of-way constructed and
maintained by the taxpayer, while railroads had to build and maintain
their own trackage. Furthermore, the subsidized highway and road
programs led to an overexpansion of automobile-using suburbs, the
coerced bulldozing of countless homes and businesses, and an artificial
burdening of the central cities. The cost to the taxpayer and to the
economy has been enormous.

Particularly subsidized has been the urban auto-using commuter, and it
is precisely in the cities where traffic congestion has burgeoned along
with this subsidy to overaccumulation of their traffic. Professor
William Vickrey of Columbia University has estimated that urban
expressways have been built at a cost of from 6 cents to 27 cents per
vehicle-mile, while users pay in gasoline and other auto taxes only
about 1 cent per vehicle-mile. The general taxpayer rather than the
motorist pays for maintenance of urban streets. Furthermore, the
gasoline tax is paid per mile regardless of the particular street or
highway being used, and regardless of the time of day of the ride.
Hence, when highways are financed from the general gasoline tax fund,
the users of the low-cost rural highways are being taxed in order to
subsidize the users of the far higher-cost urban expressways. Rural
highways typically cost only 2 cents per vehicle-mile to build and
maintain.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn4)^

In addition, the gasoline tax is scarcely a rational pricing system for
the use of the roads, and no private firms would ever price the use of
roads in that way. Private business prices its goods and services to
“clear the market,” so that supply equals demand, and there are neither
shortages nor goods going unsold. The fact that gasoline taxes are paid
per mile regardless of the road means that the more highly demanded
urban streets and highways are facing a situation where the price
charged is far below the free-market price. The result is enormous and
aggravated traffic congestion on the heavily traveled streets and roads,
especially in rush hours, and a virtually unused network of roads in
rural areas. A rational pricing system would at the same time maximize
profits for road owners and always provide clear streets free of
congestion. In the current system, the government holds the price to
users of congested roads extremely low and far below the free-market
price; the result is a chronic shortage of road space reflected in
traffic congestion. The government has invariably tried to meet this
growing problem not by rational pricing but by building still more
roads, socking the taxpayer for yet greater subsidies to drivers, and
thereby making the shortage still worse. Frantically increasing the
supply while holding the price of use far below the market simply leads
to chronic and aggravated congestion.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn5)^ It
is like a dog chasing a mechanical rabbit. Thus, the *Washington Post*
has traced the impact of the federal highway program in the nation’s
capital:

> Washington’s Capital Beltway was one of the first major links in the
> system to be completed. When the last section was opened in the summer
> of 1964, it was hailed as one of the finest highways ever built.
>
> It was expected to (a) relieve traffic congestion in downtown
> Washington by providing a bypass for north-south traffic and (b) knit
> together the suburban counties and cities ringing the capital.
>
> What the Beltway actually became was (a) a commuter highway and local
> traffic circulator and (b) the cause of an enormous building boom that
> accelerated the flight of the white and the affluent from the central
> city.
>
> Instead of relieving traffic congestion, the Beltway has increased it.
> Along with I-95, 70-S, and I-66, it has made it possible for commuters
> to move farther and farther from their downtown jobs.
>
> It has also led to relocation of government agencies and retail and
> service firms from downtown to the suburbs, putting the jobs they
> create out of reach of many inner city
> dwellers.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn6)^

What would a rational pricing system, a system instituted by private
road owners, look like? In the first place, highways would charge tolls,
especially at such convenient entrances to cities as bridges and
tunnels, but not as is charged now. For example, toll charges would be
much higher at rush-hour and other peak-hour traffic (e.g., Sundays in
the summer) than in off-hours. In a free market, the greater demand at
peak hours would lead to higher toll charges, until congestion would be
eliminated and the flow of traffic steady. But people *have* to go to
work, the reader will ask? Surely, but they don’t *have* to go in their
own cars. Some commuters will give up altogether and move back to the
city; others will go in car pools; still others will ride in express
busses or trains. In this way, use of the roads at peak hours would be
restricted to those most willing to pay the market-clearing price for
their use. Others, too, will endeavor to shift their times of work so as
to come in and leave at staggered hours. Weekenders would also drive
less or stagger their hours. Finally, the higher profits to be earned
from, say, bridges and tunnels, will lead private firms to build more of
them. Road building will be governed not by the clamor of pressure
groups and users for subsidies, but by the efficient demand and cost
calculations of the marketplace.

While many people can envision the working of private *highways*, they
boggle at the thought of private urban streets. How would *they* be
priced? Would there be toll gates at every block? Obviously not, for
such a system would be clearly uneconomic, prohibitively costly to the
owner and driver alike. In the first place, the street owners will price
*parking* far more rationally than at present. They will price parking
on congested downtown streets very heavily, in response to the enormous
demand. And contrary to common practice nowadays, they will charge
proportionately far *more* rather than less for longer, all-day parking.
In short, the street owners will try to induce rapid turnover in the
congested areas. All right for parking; again, this is readily
understandable. But what about *driving* on congested urban streets? How
could this be priced? There are numerous possible ways. In the first
place the downtown street owners might require anyone driving on their
streets to buy a license, which could be displayed on the car as
licenses and stickers are now. But, furthermore, they might require
anyone driving at peak hours to buy and display an extra, very costly
license. There are other ways. Modern technology may make feasible the
requirement that all cars equip themselves with a meter, a meter which
will not only click away per mile, but may speed up in a predetermined
manner on congested streets and roads at peak hours. Then the car owner
could receive a bill at the end of the month. A similar plan was set
forth a decade ago by Professor A.A. Walters:

> The particular administrative instruments which might be used
> include... special mileometers (similar to those used by taxis). ...
> The special mileometers would record mileage when the “flag” is up and
> a charge would be levied on this mileage. This would be suitable for
> large urban areas such as New York, London, Chicago, etc. “Flag-up”
> streets could be specified for certain hours of the day. Vehicles
> might be allowed to travel on those streets without a special
> mileometer provided that they bought and displayed a daily “sticker.”
> The occasional traffic on “sticker” authority would have been charged
> more than the maximum amount paid by those on mileometer authority.
> The supervision of the scheme would be fairly simple. Cameras could be
> set up to record those cars without sticker or flag, and a suitable
> fine could be levied for
> contravention.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn7)^

Professor Vickrey has also suggested that TV cameras at the
intersections of the most congested streets could record the license
numbers of all cars, with motorists sent a bill each month in proportion
to all the times that they crossed the intersection. Alternatively, he
proposed that each car could be equipped with the Oxford electronic
metering device; each car would then emit its own unique signal which
would be picked up by the device placed at the given
intersection.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn8)^

In any case, the problem of rational pricing for streets and highways
would be an easy one for private enterprise and modern technology to
solve. Businessmen on the free market have readily solved far more
difficult problems; all that is needed is to allow them the room to
function.

If all transportation were set completely free, if the roads, airlines,
railroads, and waterways were freed of their labyrinthine networks of
subsidies, controls, and regulations in a purely private system, how
would the consumers allocate their transportation dollars? Would we
return to railroad travel, for example? The best estimates of cost and
demand for transportation predict that railroads would become the main
staple for long-haul freight, airlines for long-range passenger service,
trucks for short-haul freight, and busses for public commuter travel.
While railroads, in short, would stage a comeback for long-haul freight,
they would not be revivified for much passenger service. In recent
years, many liberals who have become disenchanted with the overbuilding
of highways have been calling for massive discouragement of highway use,
and the subsidizing and building of subways and commuter railways on a
vast scale for urban traffic. But these grandiose schemes ignore the
enormous expense and waste that would be involved. For even if many of
these highways should not have been built, they are *there*, and it
would be folly not to take advantage of them. In recent years, some
intelligent transportation economists have raised their voices against
the massive waste involved in constructing new rapid transit railroads
(such as in the San Francisco Bay area) and have called instead for
making use of the existing highways through employing express busses for
commuting.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn9)^

It is not difficult to envision a network of private, unsubsidized and
unregulated railroads and airlines; but could there be a system of
private roads? Could such a system be at all feasible? One answer is
that private roads have worked admirably in the past. In England before
the eighteenth century, for example, roads, invariably owned and
operated by local governments, were badly constructed and even more
badly maintained. These public roads could never have supported the
mighty Industrial Revolution that England experienced in the eighteenth
century, the “revolution” that ushered in the modern age. The vital task
of improving the almost impassable English roads was performed by
private turnpike companies, which, beginning in 1706, organized and
established the great network of roads which made England the envy of
the world. The owners of these private turnpike companies were generally
landowners, merchants, and industrialists in the area being served by
the road, and they recouped their costs by charging tolls at selected
tollgates. Often the collection of tolls was leased out for a year or
more to individuals selected by competitive bids at auction. It was
these private roads that developed an internal market in England, and
that greatly lowered the costs of transport of coal and other bulky
material. And since it was mutually beneficial for them to do so, the
turnpike companies linked up with each other to form an interconnected
road network throughout the land—all a result of private enterprise in
action.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn10)^

As in England, so in the United States a little later in time. Faced
again with virtually impassable roads built by local governmental units,
private companies built and financed a great turnpike network throughout
the northeastern states, from approximately 1800 to 1830. Once again,
private enterprise proved superior in road building and ownership to the
backward operations of government. The roads were built and operated by
private turnpike corporations, and tolls were charged to the users.
Again, the turnpike companies were largely financed by merchants and
property owners along the routes, and they voluntarily linked themselves
into an interconnected network of roads. And these turnpikes constituted
the first really good roads in the United
States.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn11)^

# 12 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, III: POLICE, LAW, AND THE COURTS [19-chap12.html#page267]

## POLICE PROTECTION [police-protection]

The market and private enterprise do exist, and so most people can
readily envision a free market in most goods and services. Probably the
most difficult single area to grasp, however, is the abolition of
government operations in the service of protection: police, the courts,
etc.—the area encompassing defense of person and property against attack
or invasion. How could private enterprise and the free market possibly
provide such service? How could police, legal systems, judicial
services, law enforcement, prisons—how could these be provided in a free
market? We have already seen how a great deal of police protection, at
the least, could be supplied by the various owners of streets and land
areas. But we now need to examine this entire area systematically.

In the first place, there is a common fallacy, held even by most
advocates of laissez-faire, that the government must supply “police
protection,” as if police protection were a single, absolute entity, a
fixed quantity of something which the government supplies to all. But in
actual fact there is no absolute commodity called “police protection”
any more than there is an absolute single commodity called “food” or
“shelter.” It is true that everyone pays taxes for a seemingly fixed
quantity of protection, but this is a myth. In actual fact, there are
almost infinite degrees of all sorts of protection. For any given person
or business, the police can provide everything from a policeman on the
beat who patrols once a night, to two policemen patrolling constantly on
each block, to cruising patrol cars, to one or even several
round-the-clock personal bodyguards. Furthermore, there are many other
decisions the police must make, the complexity of which becomes evident
as soon as we look beneath the veil of the myth of absolute
“protection.” How shall the police allocate their funds which are, of
course, always limited as are the funds of all other individuals,
organizations, and agencies? How much shall the police invest in
electronic equipment? fingerprinting equipment? detectives as against
uniformed police? patrol cars as against foot police, etc.?

The point is that the government has no rational way to make these
allocations. The government only knows that it has a limited budget. Its
allocations of funds are then subject to the full play of politics,
boondoggling, and bureaucratic inefficiency, with no indication at all
as to whether the police department is serving the consumers in a way
responsive to their desires or whether it is doing so efficiently. The
situation would be different if police services were supplied on a free,
competitive market. In that case, consumers would pay for whatever
degree of protection they wish to purchase. The consumers who just want
to see a policeman once in a while would pay less than those who want
continuous patrolling, and far less than those who demand 24-hour
bodyguard service. On the free market, protection would be supplied in
proportion and in whatever way that the consumers wish to pay for it. A
drive for efficiency would be insured, as it always is on the market, by
the compulsion to make profits and avoid losses, and thereby to keep
costs low and to serve the highest demands of the consumers. Any police
firm that suffers from gross inefficiency would soon go bankrupt and
disappear.

One big problem a government police force must always face is: what laws
*really* to enforce? Police departments are theoretically faced with the
absolute injunction, “enforce all laws,” but in practice a limited
budget forces them to allocate their personnel and equipment to the most
urgent crimes. But the absolute dictum pursues them and works against a
rational allocation of resources. On the free market, what would be
enforced is whatever the customers are willing to pay for. Suppose, for
example, that Mr. Jones has a precious gem he believes might soon be
stolen. He can ask, and pay for, round-the-clock police protection at
whatever strength he may wish to work out with the police company. He
might, on the other hand, also have a private road on his estate he
doesn’t want many people to travel on—but he might not *care* very much
about trespassers on that road. In that case, he won’t devote any police
resources to protecting the road. As on the market in general, it is up
to the consumer—and since all of us are consumers this means each person
individually decides how much and what kind of protection he wants and
is willing to buy.

All that we have said about landowners’ police applies to private police
in general. Free-market police would not only be efficient, they would
have a strong incentive to be courteous and to refrain from brutality
against either their clients or their clients’ friends or customers. A
private Central Park would be guarded efficiently in order to maximize
park revenue, rather than have a prohibitive curfew imposed on
innocent—and paying—customers. A free market in police would reward
efficient and courteous police protection to customers and penalize any
falling off from this standard. No longer would there be the current
disjunction between service and payment inherent in all government
operations, a disjunction which means that police, like all other
government agencies, acquire their revenue, not voluntarily and
competitively from consumers, but from the taxpayers coercively.

In fact, as government police have become increasingly inefficient,
consumers have been turning more and more to private forms of
protection. We have already mentioned block or neighborhood protection.
There are also private guards, insurance companies, private detectives,
and such increasingly sophisticated equipment as safes, locks, and
closed-circuit TV and burglar alarms. The President’s Commission on Law
Enforcement and the Administration of Justice estimated in 1969 that
government police cost the American public \$2.8 billion a year, while
it spends \$1.35 billion on private protection service and another \$200
million on equipment, so that private protection expenses amounted to
over half the outlay on government police. These figures should give
pause to those credulous folk who believe that police protection is
somehow, by some mystic right or power, necessarily and forevermore an
attribute of State sovereignty.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn1)^

Every reader of detective fiction knows that private insurance
detectives are far more efficient than the police in recovering stolen
property. Not only is the insurance company impelled by economics to
serve the consumer—and thereby try to avoid paying benefits—but the
major focus of the insurance company is very different from that of the
police. The police, standing as they do for a mythical “society,” are
primarily interested in catching and punishing the criminal; restoring
the stolen loot to the victim is strictly secondary. To the insurance
company and its detectives, on the other hand, the prime concern is
recovery of the loot, and apprehension and punishment of the criminal is
secondary to the prime purpose of aiding the victim of crime. Here we
see again the difference between a private firm impelled to serve the
customer-victim of crime and the public police, which is under no such
economic compulsion.

We cannot blueprint a market that exists only as an hypothesis, but it
is reasonable to believe that police service in the libertarian society
would be supplied by the landowners or by insurance companies. Since
insurance companies would be paying benefits to victims of crime, it is
highly likely that they would supply police service as a means of
keeping down crime and hence their payment of benefits. It is certainly
likely in any case that police service would be paid for in regular
monthly premiums, with the police agency—whether insurance company or
not—called on whenever needed.

This supplies what should be the first simple answer to a typical
nightmare question of people who first hear about the idea of a totally
private police: “Why, that means that if you’re attacked or robbed you
have to rush over to a policeman and start dickering on how much it will
cost to defend you.” A moment’s reflection should show that no service
is supplied in this way on the free market. Obviously, the person who
wants to be protected by Agency A or Insurance Company B will pay
regular premiums rather than wait to be attacked before buying
protection. “But suppose an emergency occurs and a Company A policeman
sees someone being mugged; will he stop to ask if the victim has bought
insurance from Company A?” In the first place, this sort of street crime
will be taken care of, as we noted above, by the police hired by whoever
owns the street in question. But what of the unlikely case that a
neighborhood does not have street police, and a policeman of Company A
happens to see someone being attacked? Will he rush to the victim’s
defense? That, of course, would be up to Company A, but it is scarcely
conceivable that private police companies would not cultivate goodwill
by making it a policy to give free aid to victims in emergency
situations and perhaps ask the rescued victim for a voluntary donation
afterward. In the case of a homeowner being robbed or attacked, then of
course he will call on whichever police company he has been using. He
will call Police Company A rather than “the police” he calls upon now.

Competition insures efficiency, low price, and high quality, and there
is no reason to assume *a priori*, as many people do, that there is
something divinely ordained about having only *one* police agency in a
given geographical area. Economists have often claimed that the
production of certain goods or services is a “natural monopoly,” so that
more than one private agency could not long survive in a given area.
Perhaps, although only a totally free market could decide the matter
once and for all. Only the market can decide what and how many firms,
and of what size and quality, can survive in active competition. But
there is no reason to suppose in advance that police protection is a
“natural monopoly.” After all, insurance companies are not; and if we
can have Metropolitan, Equitable, Prudential, etc., insurance companies
coexisting side by side, why not Metropolitan, Equitable, and Prudential
police protection companies? Gustave de Molinari, the nineteenth-century
French free-market economist, was the first person in history to
contemplate and advocate a free market for police
protection.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn2)^ Molinari estimated that
there would eventually turn out to be several private police agencies
side by side in the cities, and one private agency in each rural area.
Perhaps—but we must realize that modern technology makes much more
feasible branch offices of large urban firms in even the most remote
rural areas. A person living in a small village in Wyoming, therefore,
could employ the services of a local protection company, or he might use
a nearby branch office of the Metropolitan Protection Company.

“But how could a poor person afford private protection he would have to
pay for instead of getting free protection, as he does now?” There are
several answers to this question, one of the most common criticisms of
the idea of totally private police protection. One is: that this problem
of course applies to *any* commodity or service in the libertarian
society, not just the police. But isn’t protection necessary? Perhaps,
but then so is food of many different kinds, clothing, shelter, etc.
Surely these are at least as vital if not more so than police
protection, and yet almost nobody says that *therefore* the government
must nationalize food, clothing, shelter, etc., and supply these free as
a compulsory monopoly. Very poor people would be supplied, in general,
by private charity, as we saw in our chapter on welfare. Furthermore, in
the specific case of police there would undoubtedly be ways of
voluntarily supplying free police protection to the indigent—either by
the police companies themselves for goodwill (as hospitals and doctors
do now) or by special “police aid” societies that would do work similar
to “legal aid” societies today. (Legal aid societies voluntarily supply
free legal counsel to the indigent in trouble with the authorities.)

There are important supplementary considerations. As we have seen,
police service is *not* “free”; it is paid for by the taxpayer, and the
taxpayer is very often the poor person himself. He may very well be
paying more in taxes for police now than he would in fees to private,
and far more efficient, police companies. Furthermore, the police
companies would be tapping a mass market; with the economies of such a
large-scale market, police protection would undoubtedly be much cheaper.
No police company would wish to price itself out of a large chunk of its
market, and the cost of protection would be no more prohibitively
expensive than, say, the cost of insurance today. (In fact, it would
tend to be much cheaper than current insurance, because the insurance
industry today is heavily regulated by government to keep out low-cost
competition.)

There is a final nightmare which most people who have contemplated
private protection agencies consider to be decisive in rejecting such a
concept. Wouldn’t the agencies always be clashing? Wouldn’t “anarchy”
break out, with perpetual conflicts between police forces as one person
calls in “his” police while a rival calls in “his”?

There are several levels of answers to this crucial question. In the
first place, since there would be no overall State, no central or even
single local government, we would *at least* be spared the horror of
inter-State wars, with their plethora of massive, superdestructive, and
now nuclear, weapons. As we look back through history, isn’t it
painfully clear that the number of people killed in isolated
neighborhood “rumbles” or conflicts is as nothing to the total mass
devastation of interstate wars? There are good reasons for this. To
avoid emotionalism let us take two hypothetical countries: “Ruritania”
and “Walldavia.” If both Ruritania and Walldavia were dissolved into a
libertarian society, with no government and innumerable private
individuals, firms, and police agencies, the only clashes that *could*
break out would be local, and the weaponry would necessarily be strictly
limited in scope and devastation. Suppose that in a Ruritanian city two
police agencies clash and start shooting it out. At worst, they could
*not* use mass bombing or nuclear destruction or germ warfare, since
they themselves would be blown up in the holocaust. It is the slicing
off of territorial areas into single, governmental monopolies that leads
to mass destruction—for *then* if the single monopoly government of
Walldavia confronts its ancient rival, the government of Ruritania, each
can wield weapons of mass destruction and even nuclear warfare because
it will be the “other guy” and the “other country” they will hurt.
Furthermore, now that every person is a subject of a monopoly
government, in the eyes of every other government he becomes
irretrievably *identified* with “his” government. The citizen of France
is identified with “his” government, and therefore if another government
attacks France, it will attack the citizenry as well as the government
of France. But if Company A battles with Company B, the *most* that can
happen is that the respective customers of each company may be dragged
into the battle—but *no one else.* It should be evident, then, that
*even* if the worst happened, and a libertarian world would indeed
become a world of “anarchy,” we would *still* be much better off than we
are now, at the mercy of rampant, “anarchic” nation-states, each
possessing a fearsome monopoly of weapons of mass destruction. We must
never forget that we are all living, and always have lived, in a world
of “international anarchy,” in a world of coercive nation-states
unchecked by any overall world government, and there is no prospect of
this situation changing.

A libertarian world, then, even if anarchic, would still not suffer the
brutal wars, the mass devastation, the A-bombing, that our State-ridden
world has suffered for centuries. Even if local police clash
continually, there would be no more Dresdens, no more Hiroshimas.

But there is far more to be said. We should never concede that this
local “anarchy” would be likely to occur. Let us separate the problem of
police clashes into distinct and different parts: honest disagreements,
and the attempt of one or more police forces to become “outlaws” and to
extract funds or impose their rule by coercion. Let us assume for a
moment that the police forces will be honest, and that they are only
driven by honest clashes of opinion; we will set aside for a while the
problem of outlaw police. Surely one of the very important aspects of
protection service the police can offer their respective customers is
quiet protection. Every consumer, every buyer of police protection,
would wish above all for protection that is efficient and quiet, with no
conflicts or disturbances. Every police agency would be fully aware of
this vital fact. To assume that police would continually clash and
battle with each other is absurd, for it ignores the devastating effect
that this chaotic “anarchy” would have on the business of all the police
companies. To put it bluntly, such wars and conflicts would be bad—very
bad—for business. Therefore, on the free market, the police agencies
would all see to it that there would be no clashes between them, and
that all conflicts of opinion would be ironed out in private courts,
decided by private judges or arbitrators.

To get more specific: in the first place, as we have said, clashes would
be minimal because the street owner would have his guards, the
storekeeper his, the landlord his, and the homeowner his own police
company. Realistically, in the everyday world there would be little room
for direct clashes between police agencies. But suppose, as will
sometimes occur two neighboring homeowners get into a fight, each
accuses the other of initiating assault or violence, and each calls on
his own police company, should they happen to subscribe to different
companies. What then? Again, it would be pointless and economically as
well as physically self-destructive for the two police companies to
start shooting it out. Instead, every police company, to remain in
business at all, would announce as a *vital part* of its service, the
use of private courts or arbitrators to decide who is in the wrong.

## THE COURTS [the-courts-1]

Suppose, then, that the judge or arbitrator decides Smith was in the
wrong in a dispute, and that he aggressed against Jones. If Smith
accepts the verdict, then, whatever damages or punishment is levied,
there is no problem for the theory of libertarian protection. But what
if he does not accept it? Or suppose another example: Jones is robbed.
He sets his police company to do detective work in trying to track down
the criminal. The company decides that a certain Brown is the criminal.
Then what? If Brown acknowledges his guilt, then again there is no
problem and judicial punishment proceeds, centering on forcing the
criminal to make restitution to the victim. But, again, what if Brown
denies his guilt?

These cases take us out of the realm of police protection and into
another vital area of protection: *judicial* service, i.e., the
provision, in accordance with generally accepted procedures, of a method
of trying as best as one can to determine *who* is the criminal, or
*who* is the breaker of contracts, in any sort of crime or dispute. Many
people, even those who acknowledge that there could be privately
competitive police service supplied on a free market, balk at the idea
of totally private courts. How in the world could *courts* be private?
How would courts employ force in a world without government? Wouldn’t
eternal conflicts and “anarchy” *then* ensue?

In the first place, the monopoly courts of government are subject to the
same grievous problems, inefficiencies, and contempt for the consumer as
any other government operation. We all know that judges, for example,
are *not* selected according to their wisdom, probity, or efficiency in
serving the consumer, but are political hacks chosen by the political
process. Furthermore, the courts are monopolies; if, for example, the
courts in some town or city should become corrupt, venal, oppressive, or
inefficient, the citizen at present has no recourse. The aggrieved
citizen of Deep Falls, Wyoming, must be governed by the local Wyoming
court or not at all. In a libertarian society, there would be many
courts, many judges to whom he could turn. Again, there is no reason to
assume a “natural monopoly” of judicial wisdom. The Deep Falls citizen
could, for example, call upon the local branch of the Prudential
Judicial Company.

How would courts be financed in a free society? There are many
possibilities. Possibly, each individual would subscribe to a court
service, paying a monthly premium, and then calling upon the court if he
is in need. Or, since courts will probably be needed much less
frequently than policemen, he may pay a fee whenever he chooses to use
the court, with the criminal or contract-breaker eventually recompensing
the victim or plaintiff. Or, in still a third possibility, the courts
may be hired by the police agencies to settle disputes, *or* there may
even be “vertically integrated” firms supplying *both* police and
judicial service: the Prudential Judicial Company might have a police
and a judicial division. Only the market will be able to decide which of
these methods will be most appropriate.

We should all be more familiar with the increasing use of private
arbitration, even in our present society. The government courts have
become so clogged, inefficient, and wasteful that more and more parties
to disputes are turning to private arbitrators as a cheaper and far less
time-consuming way of settling their disputes. In recent years, private
arbitration has become a growing and highly successful profession. Being
voluntary, furthermore, the rules of arbitration can be decided rapidly
by the parties themselves, without the need for a ponderous, complex
legal framework applicable to all citizens. Arbitration therefore
permits judgments to be made by people expert in the trade or occupation
concerned. Currently, the American Arbitration Association, whose motto
is “The Handclasp is Mightier than the Fist,” has 25 regional offices
throughout the country, with 23,000 arbitrators. In 1969, the
Association conducted over 22,000 arbitrations. In addition, the
insurance companies adjust over 50,000 claims a year through voluntary
arbitration. There is also a growing and successful use of private
arbitrators in automobile accident claim cases.

It might be protested that, while performing an ever greater proportion
of judicial functions, the private arbitrators’ decisions are still
enforced by the courts, so that once the disputing parties agree on an
arbitrator, his decision becomes legally binding. This is true, but it
was *not* the case before 1920, and the arbitration profession grew at
as rapid a rate from 1900 to 1920 as it has since. In fact, the modern
arbitration movement began in full force in England during the time of
the American Civil War, with merchants increasingly using the “private
courts” provided by voluntary arbitrators, even though the decisions
were not legally binding. By 1900, voluntary arbitration began to take
hold in the United States. In fact, in medieval England, the entire
structure of merchant law, which was handled clumsily and inefficiently
by the government’s courts, grew up in private merchants’ courts. The
merchants’ courts were purely voluntary arbitrators, and the decisions
were not legally binding. How, then, were they successful?

The answer is that the merchants, in the Middle Ages and down to 1920,
relied solely on ostracism and boycott by the other merchants in the
area. In other words, should a merchant refuse to submit to arbitration
or ignore a decision, the other merchants would publish this fact in the
trade, and would refuse to deal with the recalcitrant merchant, bringing
him quickly to heel. Wooldridge mentions one medieval example:

> Merchants made their courts work simply by agreeing to abide by the
> results. The merchant who broke the understanding would not be sent to
> jail, to be sure, but neither would he long continue to be a merchant,
> for the compliance exacted by his fellows, and their power over his
> goods, proved if anything more effective than physical coercion. Take
> John of Homing, who made his living marketing wholesale quantities of
> fish. When John sold a lot of herring on the representation that it
> conformed to a three-barrel sample, but which, his fellow merchants
> found, was actually mixed with “sticklebacks and putrid herring,” he
> made good the deficiency on pain of economic
> ostracism.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn3)^

In modern times, ostracism became even more effective, and it included
the knowledge that anyone who ignored an arbitrator’s award could never
again avail himself of an arbitrator’s services. Industrialist Owen D.
Young, head of General Electric, concluded that the moral censure of
other businessmen was a far more effective sanction than legal
enforcement. Nowadays, modern technology, computers, and credit ratings
would make such nationwide ostracism even more effective than it has
ever been in the past.

Even if purely voluntary arbitration is sufficient for commercial
disputes, however, what of frankly criminal activities: the mugger, the
rapist, the bank robber? In these cases, it must be admitted that
ostracism would probably not be sufficient—even though it would also
include, we must remember, refusal of private street owners to allow
such criminals in their areas. For the criminal cases, then, courts and
legal enforcement become necessary.

How, then, would the courts operate in the libertarian society? In
particular, how could they *enforce* their decisions? In all their
operations, furthermore, they must observe the critical libertarian rule
that no physical force may be used against anyone who has not been
convicted as a criminal—otherwise, the users of such force, whether
police or courts, would be themselves liable to be convicted as
aggressors if it turned out that the person they had used force against
was innocent of crime. In contrast to statist systems, no policeman or
judge could be granted special immunity to use coercion beyond what
anyone else in society could use.

Let us now take the case we mentioned before. Mr. Jones is robbed, his
hired detective agency decides that one Brown committed the crime, and
Brown refuses to concede his guilt. What then? In the first place, we
must recognize that there is at present no overall world court or world
government enforcing its decrees; yet while we live in a state of
“international anarchy” there is little or no problem in disputes
between private citizens of two countries. Suppose that right now, for
example, a citizen of Uruguay claims that he has been swindled by a
citizen of Argentina. Which court does he go to? He goes to his own,
i.e., the victim’s or the plaintiff’s court. The case proceeds in the
Uruguayan court, and its decision is honored by the Argentinian court.
The same is true if an American feels he has been swindled by a
Canadian, and so on. In Europe after the Roman Empire, when German
tribes lived side by side and in the same areas, if a Visigoth felt that
he had been injured by a Frank, he took the case to his own court, and
the decision was generally accepted by the Franks. Going to the
plaintiff’s court is the rational libertarian procedure as well, since
the victim or plaintiff is the one who is aggrieved, and who naturally
takes the case to his own court. So, in our case, Jones would go to the
Prudential Court Company to charge Brown with theft.

It is possible, of course, that Brown is also a client of the Prudential
Court, in which case there is no problem. The Prudential’s decision
covers both parties, and becomes binding. But one important stipulation
is that no coercive subpoena power can be used against Brown, because he
must be considered innocent until he is convicted. But Brown would be
served with a voluntary subpoena, a notice that he is being tried on
such and such a charge and inviting him or his legal representative to
appear. If he does not appear, then he will be tried *in absentia*, and
this will obviously be less favorable for Brown since his side of the
case will not be pleaded in court. If Brown is declared guilty, then the
court and its marshals will employ force to seize Brown and exact
whatever punishment is decided upon—a punishment which obviously will
focus first on restitution to the victim.

What, however, if Brown does not recognize the Prudential Court? What if
he is a client of the Metropolitan Court Company? Here the case becomes
more difficult. What will happen then? First, victim Jones pleads his
case in the Prudential Court. If Brown is found innocent, this ends the
controversy. Suppose, however, that defendant Brown is found guilty. If
he does nothing, the court’s judgment proceeds against him. Suppose,
however, Brown then takes the case to the Metropolitan Court Company,
pleading inefficiency or venality by Prudential. The case will then be
heard by Metropolitan. If Metropolitan also finds Brown guilty, this too
ends the controversy and Prudential will proceed against Brown with
dispatch. Suppose, however, that Metropolitan finds Brown innocent of
the charge. Then what? Will the two courts and their arms-wielding
marshals shoot it out in the streets?

Once again, this would clearly be irrational and self-destructive
behavior on the part of the courts. An essential part of their judicial
service to their clients is the provision of just, objective, and
peacefully functioning decisions—the best and most objective way of
arriving at the truth of who committed the crime. Arriving at a decision
and then allowing chaotic gunplay would scarcely be considered valuable
judicial service by their customers. Thus, an essential part of any
court’s service to its clients would be an appeals procedure. In short,
every court would agree to abide by an appeals trial, as decided by a
voluntary arbitrator to whom Metropolitan and Prudential would now turn.
The appeals judge would make his decision, and the result of this third
trial would be treated as binding on the guilty. The Prudential court
would then proceed to enforcement.

An appeals court! But isn’t this setting up a compulsory monopoly
government once again? No, because there is nothing in the system that
requires any one person or court to be the court of appeal. In short, in
the United States at present the Supreme Court is established as *the*
court of final appeal, so the Supreme Court judges become the final
arbiters regardless of the wishes of plaintiff or defendant alike. In
contrast, in the libertarian society the various competing private
courts could go to *any* appeals judge they think fair, expert, and
objective. No single appeals judge or set of judges would be foisted
upon society by coercion.

How would the appeals judges be financed? There are many possible ways,
but the most likely is that they will be paid by the various original
courts who would charge their customers for appeals services in their
premiums or fees.

But suppose Brown insists on another appeals judge, and yet another?
Couldn’t he escape judgment by appealing *ad infinitum*? Obviously, in
*any* society legal proceedings cannot continue indefinitely; there must
be *some* cutoff point. In the present statist society, where government
monopolizes the judicial function, the Supreme Court is arbitrarily
designated as the cutoff point. In the libertarian society, there would
also have to be an agreed-upon cutoff point, and since there are only
two parties to any crime or dispute—the plaintiff and the defendant—it
seems most sensible for the legal code to declare that *a decision
arrived at by any two courts* shall be binding. This will cover the
situation when both the plaintiff’s and the defendant’s courts come to
the same decision, as well as the situation when an appeals court
decides on a disagreement between the two original courts.

## THE LAW AND THE COURTS [19-chap12.html#page282]

It is now clear that there will have to be a legal code in the
libertarian society. How? How can there be a legal code, a system of law
*without* a government to promulgate it, an appointed system of judges,
or a legislature to vote on statutes? To begin with, is a legal code
consistent with libertarian principles?

To answer the last question first, it should be clear that a legal code
is necessary to lay down precise guidelines for the private courts. If,
for example, Court A decides that all redheads are inherently evil and
must be punished, it is clear that such decisions are the reverse of
libertarian, that such a law would constitute an invasion of the rights
of redheads. Hence, any such decision would be *illegal* in terms of
libertarian principle, and could not be upheld by the rest of society.
It then becomes necessary to have a legal code which would be generally
accepted, and which the courts would pledge themselves to follow. The
legal code, simply, would insist on the libertarian principle of no
aggression against person or property, define property rights in
accordance with libertarian principle, set up rules of evidence (such as
currently apply) in deciding who are the wrongdoers in any dispute, and
set up a code of maximum punishment for any particular crime. Within the
framework of such a code, the particular courts would compete on the
most efficient procedures, and the market would then decide whether
judges, juries, etc., are the most efficient methods of providing
judicial services.

Are such stable and consistent law codes possible, with only competing
judges to develop and apply them, and without government or legislature?
Not only are they *possible*, but over the years the best and most
successful parts of our legal system were developed precisely in this
manner. Legislatures, as well as kings, have been capricious, invasive,
and inconsistent. They have only introduced anomalies and despotism into
the legal system. In fact, the government is no more qualified to
develop and apply law than it is to provide any other service; and just
as religion has been separated from the State, and the economy can be
separated from the State, so can every other State function, including
police, courts, *and* the law itself!

As indicated above, for example, the entire law merchant was developed,
not by the State or in State courts, but by private merchant courts. It
was only much later that government took over mercantile law from its
development in merchants’ courts. The same occurred with admiralty law,
the entire structure of the law of the sea, shipping, salvages, etc.
Here again, the State was not interested, and its jurisdiction did not
apply to the high seas; so the shippers themselves took on the task of
not only applying, but working out the whole structure of admiralty law
in their own private courts. Again, it was only later that the
government appropriated admiralty law into its own courts.

Finally, the major body of Anglo-Saxon law, the justly celebrated
*common law*, was developed over the centuries by competing judges
applying time-honored principles rather than the shifting decrees of the
State. These principles were not decided upon arbitrarily by any king or
legislature; they grew up over centuries by applying rational—and very
often libertarian—principles to the cases before them. The idea of
following precedent was developed, *not* as a blind service to the past,
but because all the judges of the past had made their decisions in
applying the generally accepted common law principles to specific cases
and problems. For it was universally held that the judge did not *make*
law (as he often does today); the judge’s task, his expertise, was in
*finding* the law in accepted common law principles, and then applying
that law to specific cases or to new technological or institutional
conditions. The glory of the centuries-long development of the common
law is testimony to their success.

The common law judges, furthermore, functioned very much like private
arbitrators, as experts in the law to whom private parties went with
their disputes. There was no arbitrarily imposed “supreme court” whose
decision would be binding, nor was precedent, though honored, considered
as *automatically* binding either. Thus, the libertarian Italian jurist
Bruno Leoni has written:

> courts of judicature could not easily enact arbitrary rules of their
> own in England, as they were never in a position to do so directly,
> that is to say, in the usual, sudden, widely ranging and imperious
> manner of legislators. Moreover, there were so many courts of justice
> in England and they were so jealous of one another that even the
> famous principle of the binding precedent was not openly recognized as
> valid by them until comparatively recent times. Besides, they could
> never decide anything that had not been previously brought before them
> by private persons. Finally, comparatively few people used to go
> before the courts to ask from them the rules deciding their
> cases.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn4)^

And on the absence of “supreme courts”:

> it cannot be denied that the lawyers’ law or the judiciary law may
> tend to acquire the characteristics of legislation, including its
> undesirable ones, whenever jurists or judges are entitled to decide
> ultimately on a case. ... In our time the mechanism of the judiciary
> in certain countries where “supreme courts” are established results in
> the imposition of the personal views of the members of these courts,
> or of a majority of them, on all the other people concerned whenever
> there is a great deal of disagreement between the opinion of the
> former and the convictions of the latter. But... this possibility, far
> from being necessarily implied in the nature of lawyers’ law or of
> judiciary law, is rather a deviation from
> it.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn5)^

Apart from such aberrations, the imposed personal views of the judges
were kept to a minimum: (a) by the fact that judges could only make
decisions when private citizens brought cases to them; (b) each judge’s
decisions applied only to the particular case; and (c) because the
decisions of the common-law judges and lawyers always considered the
precedents of the centuries. Furthermore, as Leoni points out, in
contrast to legislatures or the executive, where dominant majorities or
pressure groups ride roughshod over minorities, judges, by their very
position, are constrained to hear and weigh the arguments of the two
contending parties in each dispute. “Parties are *equal* as regards the
judge, in the sense that they are free to produce arguments and
evidence. They do not constitute a group in which dissenting minorities
give way to triumphant majorities.” And Leoni points out the analogy
between this process and the free-market economy: “Of course, arguments
may be stronger or weaker, but the fact that every party can produce
them is comparable to the fact that everybody can individually compete
with everybody else in the market in order to buy and
sell.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn6)^

Professor Leoni found that, in the *private law* area, the ancient Roman
judges operated in the same way as the English common law courts:

> The Roman jurist was a sort of scientist; the objects of his research
> were the solutions to cases that citizens submitted to him for study,
> just as industrialists might today submit to a physicist or to an
> engineer a technical problem concerning their plants or their
> production. Hence, private Roman law was something to be described or
> to be discovered, not something to be enacted—a world of things that
> were there, forming part of the common heritage of all Roman citizens.
> Nobody enacted that law; nobody could change it by any exercise of his
> personal will. ... This is the long-run concept or, if you prefer, the
> Roman concept, of the certainty of the
> law.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn7)^

Finally, Professor Leoni was able to use his knowledge of the operations
of ancient and common law to answer the vital question: In a libertarian
society, “who will appoint the judges... to let them perform the task of
defining the law?” His answer is: the *people* themselves, people who
would go to the judges with the greatest reputation of expertise and
wisdom in knowing and applying the basic common legal principles of the
society:

> In fact, it is rather immaterial to establish in advance who will
> appoint the judges, for, in a sense, everybody could do so, as happens
> to a certain extent when people resort to private arbiters to settle
> their own quarrels. ... For the appointment of judges is not such a
> special problem as would be, for example, that of “appointing”
> physicists or doctors or other kinds of learned and experienced
> people. The emergence of good professional people in any society is
> only apparently due to official appointments, if any. It is, in fact,
> based on a widespread consent on the part of clients, colleagues, and
> the public at large—a consent without which no appointment is really
> effective. Of course, people can be wrong about the true value chosen
> as being worthy, but these difficulties in their choice are
> inescapable in any kind of choice.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn8)^

Of course, in the future libertarian society, the basic legal code would
not rely on blind custom, much of which could well be antilibertarian.
The code would have to be established on the basis of acknowledged
libertarian principle, of nonaggression against the person or property
of others; in short, on the basis of reason rather than on mere
tradition, however sound its general outlines. Since we have a body of
common law principles to draw on, however, the task of reason in
correcting and amending the common law would be far easier than trying
to construct a body of systematic legal principles *de novo* out of the
thin air.

The most remarkable historical example of a society of libertarian law
and courts, however, has been neglected by historians until very
recently. And this was also a society where not only the courts and the
law were largely libertarian, but where they operated within a purely
*state-less* and libertarian society. This was ancient Ireland—an
Ireland which persisted in this libertarian path for roughly a thousand
years until its brutal conquest by England in the seventeenth century.
And, in contrast to many similarly functioning primitive tribes (such as
the Ibos in West Africa, and many European tribes), preconquest Ireland
was not in any sense a “primitive” society: it was a highly complex
society that was, for centuries, the most advanced, most scholarly, and
most civilized in all of Western Europe.

For a thousand years, then, ancient Celtic Ireland had no State or
anything like it. As the leading authority on ancient Irish law has
written: “There was no legislature, no bailiffs, no police, no public
enforcement of justice. ... There was no trace of State-administered
justice.”^[9](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn9)^

How then was justice secured? The basic political unit of ancient
Ireland was the *tuath*. All “freemen” who owned land, all
professionals, and all craftsmen, were entitled to become members of a
*tuath*. Each *tuath’s* members formed an annual assembly which decided
all common policies, declared war or peace on other *tuatha*, and
elected or deposed their “kings.” An important point is that, in
contrast to primitive tribes, no one was stuck or bound to a given
*tuath*, either because of kinship or of geographical location.
Individual members were free to, and often did, secede from a *tuath*
and join a competing *tuath*. Often, two or more *tuatha* decided to
merge into a single, more efficient unit. As Professor Peden states,
“the *tuath* is thus a body of persons voluntarily united for socially
beneficial purposes and the sum total of the landed properties of its
members constituted its territorial
dimension.”^[10](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn10)^ In short, they did not
have the modern State with its claim to sovereignty over a given
(usually expanding) territorial area, divorced from the landed property
rights of its subjects; on the contrary, *tuatha* were voluntary
associations which only comprised the landed properties of its voluntary
members. Historically, about 80 to 100 *tuatha* coexisted at any time
throughout Ireland.

But what of the elected “king”? Did *he* constitute a form of State
ruler? Chiefly, the king functioned as a religious high priest,
presiding over the worship rites of the *tuath*, which functioned as a
voluntary religious, as well as a social and political, organization. As
in pagan, pre-Christian, priesthoods, the kingly function was
hereditary, this practice carrying over to Christian times. The king was
elected by the *tuath* from within a royal kin-group (the *derbfine*),
which carried the hereditary priestly function. *Politically*, however,
the king had strictly limited functions: he was the military leader of
the *tuath*, and he presided over the *tuath* assemblies. But he could
only conduct war or peace negotiations as agent of the assemblies; and
he was in no sense sovereign and had no rights of administering justice
over *tuath* members. He could not legislate, and when he himself was
party to a lawsuit, he had to submit his case to an independent judicial
arbiter.

Again, how, then, was law developed and justice maintained? In the first
place, the law itself was based on a body of ancient and immemorial
custom, passed down as oral and then written tradition through a class
of professional jurists called the *brehons*. The brehons were in no
sense public, or governmental, officials; they were simply selected by
parties to disputes on the basis of their reputations for wisdom,
knowledge of the customary law, and the integrity of their decisions. As
Professor Peden states:

> the professional jurists were consulted by parties to disputes for
> advice as to what the law was in particular cases, and these same men
> often acted as arbitrators between suitors. They remained at all times
> private persons, not public officials; their functioning depended upon
> their knowledge of the law and the integrity of their judicial
> reputations.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn11)^

Furthermore, the brehons had *no connection whatsoever* with the
individual *tuatha* or with their kings. They were completely private,
national in scope, and were used by disputants throughout Ireland.
Moreover, and this is a vital point, in contrast to the system of
private Roman lawyers, the brehon was all there was; there were no other
judges, no “public” judges of any kind, in ancient Ireland.

It was the brehons who were schooled in the law, and who added glosses
and applications to the law to fit changing conditions. Furthermore,
there was no monopoly, in any sense, of the brehon jurists; instead,
several competing schools of jurisprudence existed and competed for the
custom of the Irish people.

How were the decisions of the brehons enforced? Through an elaborate,
voluntarily developed system of “insurance,” or sureties. Men were
linked together by a variety of surety relationships by which they
guaranteed one another for the righting of wrongs, and for the
enforcement of justice and the decisions of the brehons. In short, the
brehons themselves were not involved in the enforcement of decisions,
which rested again with private individuals linked through sureties.
There were various types of surety. For example, the surety would
guarantee with his own property the payment of a debt, and then join the
plaintiff in enforcing a debt judgment if the debtor refused to pay. In
that case, the debtor would have to pay double damages: one to the
original creditor, and another as compensation to his surety. And this
system applied to all offences, aggressions and assaults as well as
commercial contracts; in short, it applied to all cases of what we would
call “civil” and “criminal” law. All criminals were considered to be
“debtors” who owed restitution and compensation to their victims, who
thus became their “creditors.” The victim would gather his sureties
around him and proceed to apprehend the criminal or to proclaim his suit
publicly and demand that the defendant submit to adjudication of their
dispute with the brehons. The criminal might then send his own sureties
to negotiate a settlement or agree to submit the dispute to the brehons.
If he did not do so, he was considered an “outlaw” by the entire
community; he could no longer enforce any claim of his own in the
courts, and he was treated to the opprobrium of the entire
community.^[12](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn12)^

There were occasional “wars,” to be sure, in the thousand years of
Celtic Ireland, but they were minor brawls, negligible compared to the
devastating wars that racked the rest of Europe. As Professor Peden
points out,

> without the coercive apparatus of the State which can through taxation
> and conscription mobilize large amounts of arms and manpower, the
> Irish were unable to sustain any large scale military force in the
> field for any length of time. Irish wars... were pitiful brawls and
> cattle raids by European standards.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn13)^

Thus, we have indicated that it is perfectly possible, in theory and
historically, to have efficient and courteous police, competent and
learned judges, and a body of systematic and socially accepted law—and
none of these things being furnished by a coercive government.
Government—claiming a compulsory monopoly of protection over a
geographical area, and extracting its revenues by force—can be separated
from the entire field of protection. Government is no more necessary for
providing vital protection service than it is necessary for providing
anything else. And we have not stressed a crucial fact about government:
that its compulsory monopoly over the weapons of coercion has led it,
over the centuries, to infinitely more butcheries and infinitely greater
tyranny and oppression than any decentralized, private agencies could
possibly have done. If we look at the black record of mass murder,
exploitation, and tyranny levied on society by governments over the
ages, we need not be loath to abandon the Leviathan State and... try
freedom.

## OUTLAW PROTECTORS [19-chap12.html#page291]

We have saved for the last this problem: What if police or judges and
courts should be venal and biased—what if they should bias their
decisions, for example, in favor of particularly wealthy clients? We
have shown how a libertarian legal and judicial system could work on the
purely free market, assuming honest differences of opinion—but what if
one or more police or courts should become, in effect, outlaws? What
then?

In the first place, libertarians do not flinch from such a question. In
contrast to such utopians as Marxists or left-wing anarchists
(anarchocommunists or anarcho-syndicalists), libertarians do not assume
that the ushering in of the purely free society of their dreams will
also bring with it a new, magically transformed Libertarian Man. We do
not assume that the lion will lie down with the lamb, or that no one
will have criminal or fraudulent designs upon his neighbor. The “better”
that people will be, of course, the better *any* social system will
work, in particular the less work *any* police or courts will have to
do. But no such assumption is made by libertarians. What we assert is
that, given any particular degree of “goodness” or “badness” among men,
the purely libertarian society will be at once the most moral and the
most efficient, the least criminal and the most secure of person or
property.

Let us first consider the problem of the venal or crooked judge or
court. What of the court which favors its own wealthy client in trouble?
In the first place, any such favoritism will be highly unlikely, given
the rewards and sanctions of the free market economy. The very life of
the court, the very livelihood of a judge, will depend on his reputation
for integrity, fair-mindedness, objectivity, and the quest for truth in
every case. This is his “brand name.” Should word of any venality leak
out, he will immediately lose clients and the courts will no longer have
customers; for even those clients who may be criminally inclined will
scarcely sponsor a court whose decisions are no longer taken seriously
by the rest of society, or who themselves may well be in jail for
dishonest and fraudulent dealings. If, for example, Joe Zilch is accused
of a crime or breach of contract, and he goes to a “court” headed by his
brother-in-law, no one, least of all other, honest courts will take this
“court’s” decision seriously. It will no longer be considered a “court”
in the eyes of anyone but Joe Zilch and his family.

Contrast this built-in corrective mechanism to the present-day
government courts. Judges are appointed or elected for long terms, up to
life, and they are accorded a monopoly of decision-making in their
particular area. It is almost impossible, except in cases of gross
corruption, to do anything about venal decisions of judges. Their power
to make and to enforce their decisions continues unchecked year after
year. Their salaries continue to be paid, furnished under coercion by
the hapless taxpayer. But in the totally free society, any suspicion of
a judge or court will cause their customers to melt away and their
“decisions” to be ignored. This is a far more efficient system of
keeping judges honest than the mechanism of government.

Furthermore, the temptation for venality and bias would be far less for
another reason: business firms in the free market earn their keep, *not*
from wealthy customers, but from a mass market by consumers. Macy’s
earns its income from the mass of the population, not from a few wealthy
customers. The same is true of Metropolitan Life Insurance today, and
the same would be true of any “Metropolitan” court system tomorrow. It
would be folly indeed for the courts to risk the loss of favor by the
bulk of its customers for the favors of a few wealthy clients. But
contrast the present system, where judges, like all other politicians,
may be beholden to wealthy contributors who finance the campaigns of
their political parties.

There is a myth that the “American System” provides a superb set of
“checks and balances,” with the executive, the legislature, and the
courts all balancing and checking one against the other, so that power
cannot unduly accumulate in one set of hands. But the American “checks
and balances” system is largely a fraud. For each one of these
institutions is a coercive monopoly in its area, and all of them are
part of one government, headed by one political party at any given time.
Furthermore, at best there are only two parties, each one close to the
other in ideology and personnel, often colluding, and the actual
day-to-day business of government headed by a civil service bureaucracy
that *cannot* be displaced by the voters. Contrast to these mythical
checks and balances the *real* checks and balances provided by the
free-market economy! What keeps A&P honest is the competition, actual
and potential, of Safeway, Pioneer, and countless other grocery stores.
What keeps them honest is the ability of the consumers to cut off their
patronage. What would keep the free-market judges and courts honest is
the lively possibility of heading down the block or down the road to
*another* judge or court if suspicion should descend on any particular
one. What would keep them honest is the lively possibility of their
customers cutting off their business. These are the *real*, active
checks and balances of the free-market economy and the free society.

The same analysis applies to the possibility of a private police force
becoming outlaw, of using their coercive powers to exact tribute, set up
a “protection racket” to shake down their victims, etc. Of course, such
a thing *could* happen. But, in contrast to present-day society, there
would be immediate checks and balances available; there would be *other*
police forces who could use their weapons to band together to put down
the aggressors against their clientele. If the Metropolitan Police Force
should become gangsters and exact tribute, then the rest of society
could flock to the Prudential, Equitable, etc., police forces who could
band together to put them down. And this contrasts vividly with the
State. If a group of gangsters should capture the State apparatus, with
its monopoly of coercive weapons, there is nothing at present that can
stop them—short of the immensely difficult process of revolution. In a
libertarian society there would be no need for a massive revolution to
stop the depredation of gangster-States; there would be a swift turning
to the honest police forces to check and put down the force that had
turned bandit.

And, indeed, what is the State anyway but organized banditry? What is
taxation but theft on a gigantic, unchecked, scale? What is war but mass
murder on a scale impossible by private police forces? What is
conscription but mass enslavement? Can anyone envision a private police
force getting away with a tiny fraction of what States get away with,
and do habitually, year after year, century after century?

There is another vital consideration that would make it almost
impossible for an outlaw police force to commit anything like the
banditry that modern governments practice. One of the crucial factors
that permits governments to do the monstrous things they habitually do
is the sense of *legitimacy* on the part of the stupefied public. The
average citizen may not like—may even strongly object to—the policies
and exactions of his government. But he has been imbued with the
idea—carefully indoctrinated by centuries of governmental
propaganda—that the government is his legitimate sovereign, and that it
would be wicked or mad to refuse to obey its dictates. It is this sense
of legitimacy that the State’s intellectuals have fostered over the
ages, aided and abetted by all the trappings of legitimacy: flags,
rituals, ceremonies, awards, constitutions, etc. A bandit gang—*even if
all* the police forces conspired together into one vast gang—could never
command such legitimacy. The public would consider them purely bandits;
their extortions and tributes would never be considered legitimate
though onerous “taxes,” to be paid automatically. The public would
quickly resist these illegitimate demands and the bandits would be
resisted and overthrown. Once the public had tasted the joys,
prosperity, freedom, and efficiency of a libertarian, State-less
society, it would be almost impossible for a State to fasten itself upon
them once again. Once freedom has been fully enjoyed, it is no easy task
to force people to give it up.

But *suppose*—just suppose—that despite all these handicaps and
obstacles, despite the love for their new-found freedom, despite the
inherent checks and balances of the free market, suppose *anyway* that
the State manages to reestablish itself. What then? Well, then, all that
would have happened is that we would have a State once again. We would
be no worse off than we are now, with our current State. *And*, as one
libertarian philosopher has put it, “at least the world will have had a
glorious holiday.” Karl Marx’s ringing promise applies far more to a
libertarian society than to communism: In trying freedom, in abolishing
the State, we have nothing to lose and everything to gain.

## NATIONAL DEFENSE [national-defense]

We come now to what is usually the final argument against the
libertarian position. Every libertarian has heard a sympathetic but
critical listener say: “All right, I see how this system could be
applied successfully to local police and courts. But how could a
libertarian society defend us against the Russians?”

There are, of course, several dubious assumptions implied in such a
question. There is the assumption that the Russians are bent upon
military invasion of the United States, a doubtful assumption at best.
There is the assumption that any such desire would still remain after
the United States had become a purely libertarian society. This notion
overlooks the lesson of history that wars result from conflicts between
nation-states, each armed to the teeth, each direly suspicious of attack
by the other. But a libertarian America would clearly not be a threat to
anyone, not because it had no arms but because it would be dedicated to
no aggression against anyone, or against any country. Being no longer a
nation-state, which is inherently threatening, there would be little
chance of any country attacking us. One of the great evils of the
nation-state is that each State is able to identify all of its subjects
with itself; hence in any inter-State war, the innocent civilians, the
subjects of each country, are subject to aggression from the enemy
State. But in a libertarian society there would be no such
identification, and hence very little chance of such a devastating war.
Suppose, for example, that our outlaw Metropolitan Police Force has
initiated aggression not only against Americans but also against
Mexicans. If Mexico had a government, then clearly the Mexican
government would know full well that Americans in general were not
implicated in the Metropolitan’s crimes, and had no symbiotic
relationship with it. If the Mexican police engaged in a punitive
expedition to punish the Metropolitan force, they would not be at war
with Americans in general—as they would be now. In fact, it is highly
likely that other American forces would join the Mexicans in putting
down the aggressor. Hence, the idea of inter-State war against a
libertarian country or geographical area would most likely disappear.

There is, furthermore, a grave philosophical error in the very posing of
this sort of question about the Russians. When we contemplate *any* sort
of new system, whatever it may be, we must *first* decide whether we
want to see it brought about. In order to decide whether we *want*
libertarianism or communism, or left-wing anarchism, or theocracy, or
any other system, we must first assume that it has been established, and
*then* consider whether the system could work, whether it could remain
in existence, and just how efficient such a system would be. We have
shown, I believe, that a libertarian system, once instituted, could
work, be viable, and be at once far more efficient, prosperous, moral,
and free than any other social system. But we have said nothing about
how to *get* from the present system to the ideal; for these are two
totally separate questions: the question of what *is* our ideal goal,
and of the strategy and tactics of how to get from the present system
*to* that goal. The Russian question mixes these two levels of
discourse. It assumes, *not* that libertarianism has been established
everywhere throughout the globe, but that for some reason it has been
established *only* in America and nowhere else. But why assume this? Why
not first assume that it has been established *everywhere* and see
whether we like it? After all, the libertarian philosophy is an eternal
one, not bound to time or place. We advocate liberty for everyone,
everywhere, not just in the United States. If someone agrees that a
world libertarian society, once established, is the best that he can
conceive, that it would be workable, efficient, and moral, then let him
*become* a libertarian, let him join us in accepting liberty as our
ideal goal, and *then* join us further in the separate—and obviously
difficult—task of figuring out how to bring this ideal about.

If we do move on to strategy, it is obvious that the larger an area in
which liberty is first established the *better* its chances for
survival, and the better its chance to resist any violent overthrow that
may be attempted. If liberty is established instantaneously throughout
the world, then there will of course be *no* problem of “national
defense.” *All* problems will be local police problems. If, however,
only Deep Falls, Wyoming, becomes libertarian while the rest of America
and the world remain statist, its chances for survival will be very
slim. If Deep Falls, Wyoming, declares its secession from the United
States government and establishes a free society, the chances are great
that the United States—given its historical ferocity toward
secessionists—would quickly invade and crush the new free society, and
there is little that *any* Deep Falls police force could do about it.
Between these two polar cases, there is an infinite continuum of
degrees, and obviously, the larger the area of freedom, the better it
could withstand any outside threat. The “Russian question” is therefore
a matter of strategy rather than a matter of deciding on basic
principles and on the goal toward which we wish to direct our efforts.

But after all this is said and done, let us take up the Russian question
anyway. Let us assume that the Soviet Union would really be hell-bent on
attacking a libertarian population within the present boundaries of the
United States (clearly, there would no longer be a United States
government to form a single nation-state). In the first place, the form
and quantity of defense expenditures would be decided upon by the
American consumers themselves. Those Americans who favor Polaris
submarines, and fear a Soviet threat, would subscribe toward the
financing of such vessels. Those who prefer an ABM system would invest
in such defensive missiles. Those who laugh at such a threat or those
who are committed pacifists would not contribute to any “national”
defense service at all. Different defense theories would be applied in
proportion to those who agree with, and support, the various theories
being offered. Given the enormous waste in all wars and defense
preparations in all countries throughout history, it is certainly not
beyond the bounds of reason to propose that private, voluntary defense
efforts would be far more efficient than government boondoggles.
Certainly these efforts would be infinitely more moral.

But let us assume the worst. Let us assume that the Soviet Union at last
invades and conquers the territory of America. What then? We have to
realize that the Soviet Union’s difficulties will have only just begun.
The main reason a conquering country can rule a defeated country is that
the latter has an existing State apparatus to transmit and enforce the
victor’s orders onto a subject population. Britain, though far smaller
in area and population, was able to rule India for centuries because it
could transmit British orders to the ruling Indian princes, who in turn
could enforce them on the subject population. But in those cases in
history where the conquered *had* no government, the conquerors found
rule over the conquered extremely difficult. When the British conquered
West Africa, for example, they found it extremely difficult to govern
the Ibo tribe (later to form Biafra) because that tribe was essentially
libertarian, and had no ruling government of tribal chiefs to transmit
orders to the natives. And perhaps the major reason it took the English
centuries to conquer ancient Ireland is that the Irish had no State, and
that there was therefore no ruling governmental structure to keep
treaties, transmit orders, etc. It is for this reason that the English
kept denouncing the “wild” and “uncivilized” Irish as “faithless,”
because they would not keep treaties with the English conquerors. The
English could never understand that, lacking any sort of State, the
Irish warriors who concluded treaties with the English could *only*
speak for themselves; they could never commit any other group of the
Irish population.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn14)^

Furthermore, the occupying Russians’ lives would be made even more
difficult by the inevitable eruption of guerrilla warfare by the
American population. It is surely a lesson of the twentieth century—a
lesson first driven home by the successful American revolutionaries
against the mighty British Empire—that no occupying force can long keep
down a native population determined to resist. If the giant United
States, armed with far greater productivity and firepower, could not
succeed against a tiny and relatively unarmed Vietnamese population, how
in the world could the Soviet Union succeed in keeping down the American
people? No Russian occupation soldier’s life would be safe from the
wrath of a resisting American populace. Guerrilla warfare has proved to
be an irresistible force precisely because it stems, not from a
dictatorial central government, but from the people themselves, fighting
for their liberty and independence against a foreign State. And surely
the anticipation of this sea of troubles, of the enormous costs and
losses that would inevitably follow, would stop well in advance even a
hypothetical Soviet government bent on military conquest.

# 13 CONSERVATION, ECOLOGY, AND GROWTH [20-chap13.html#page301]

## LIBERAL COMPLAINTS [liberal-complaints]

Left-liberal intellectuals are often a wondrous group to behold. In the
last three or four decades, not a very long time in human history, they
have, like whirling dervishes, let loose a series of angry complaints
against free-market capitalism. The curious thing is that each of these
complaints has been contradictory to one or more of their predecessors.
But contradictory complaints by liberal intellectuals do not seem to
faze them or serve to abate their petulance—even though it is often the
very same intellectuals who are reversing themselves so rapidly. And
these reversals seem to make no dent whatever in their
self-righteousness or in the self-confidence of their position.

Let us consider the record of recent decades:

1\. In the late 1930s and early 1940s, the liberal intellectuals came to
the conclusion that capitalism was suffering from inevitable “secular
stagnation,” a stagnation imposed by the slowing down of population
growth, the end of the old Western frontier, and by the supposed fact
that no further inventions were possible. All this spelled eternal
stagnation, permanent mass unemployment, and therefore the need for
socialism, or thoroughgoing State planning, to replace free-market
capitalism. This on the threshold of the greatest boom in American
history!

2\. During the 1950s, despite the great boom in postwar America, the
liberal intellectuals kept raising their sights; the cult of “economic
growth” now entered the scene. To be sure, capitalism was growing, but
it was not growing fast enough. Therefore free-market capitalism must be
abandoned, and socialism or government intervention must step in and
force-feed the economy, must build investments and compel greater saving
in order to maximize the rate of growth, even if we don’t *want* to grow
that fast. Conservative economists such as Colin Clark attacked this
liberal program as “growthmanship.”

3\. Suddenly, John Kenneth Galbraith entered the liberal scene with his
best-selling *The Affluent Society* in 1958. And just as suddenly, the
liberal intellectuals reversed their indictments. The trouble with
capitalism, it now appeared, was that it had grown *too much*; we were
no longer stagnant, but *too well off*, and man had lost his
spirituality amidst supermarkets and automobile tail fins. What was
necessary, then, was for government to step in, either in massive
intervention or as socialism, and tax the consumers heavily in order to
reduce their bloated affluence.

4\. The cult of excess affluence had its day, to be superseded by a
contradictory worry about poverty, stimulated by Michael Harrington’s
*The Other America* in 1962. Suddenly, the problem with America was not
excessive affluence, but increasing and grinding poverty—and, once
again, the solution was for the government to step in, plan mightily,
and tax the wealthy in order to lift up the poor. And so we had the War
on Poverty for several years.

5\. Stagnation; deficient growth; overaffluence; overpoverty; the
intellectual fashions changed like ladies’ hemlines. Then, in 1964, the
happily short-lived Ad Hoc Committee on the Triple Revolution issued its
then-famous manifesto, which brought us and the liberal intellectuals
full circle. For two or three frenetic years we were regaled with the
idea that America’s problem was not stagnation but the exact reverse: in
a few short years all of America’s production facilities would be
automated and cybernated, incomes and production would be enormous and
superabundant, *but* everyone would be automated out of a job. Once
again, free-market capitalism would lead to permanent mass unemployment,
which could *only* be remedied—you guessed it!—by massive State
intervention or by outright socialism. For several years, in the
mid-1960s, we thus suffered from what was justly named the “Automation
Hysteria.”^[1](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn1)^

6\. By the late 1960s it was clear to everyone that the automation
hysterics had been dead wrong, that automation was proceeding at no
faster a pace than old-fashioned “mechanization” and indeed that the
1969 recession was causing a falling off in the rate of increase of
productivity. One hears no more about automation dangers nowadays; we
are now in the seventh phase of liberal economic flip-flops.

7\. Affluence is again excessive, and, in the name of conservation,
ecology, and the increasing scarcity of resources, free-market
capitalism is growing much too fast. State planning, or socialism, must,
of course, step in to abolish all growth and bring about a zero-growth
society and economy—in order to avoid negative growth, or retrogression,
sometime in the future! We are now back to a super-Galbraithian
position, to which has been added scientific jargon about effluents,
ecology, and “spaceship earth,” as well as a bitter assault on
technology itself as being an evil polluter. Capitalism has brought
about technology, growth—including population growth, industry, and
pollution—and government is supposed to step in and eradicate these
evils.

It is not at all unusual, in fact, to find the same people now holding a
contradictory blend of positions 5 and 7 and maintaining *at one and the
same time* that (a) we are living in a “post-scarcity” age where we no
longer need private property, capitalism, or material incentives to
production; *and* (b) that capitalist greed is depleting our resources
and bringing about imminent worldwide scarcity. The liberal answer to
both, or indeed to all, of these problems turns out, of course, to be
the same: socialism or state planning to replace free-market capitalism.
The great economist Joseph Schumpeter put the whole shoddy performance
of liberal intellectuals into a nutshell a generation ago:

> Capitalism stands its trial before judges who have the sentence of
> death in their pockets. They are going to pass it, whatever the
> defense they may hear; the only success victorious defense can
> possibly produce is a change in the
> indictment.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn2)^

And so, the charges, the indictments, may change and contradict previous
charges—but the answer is always and wearily the same.

## THE ATTACK ON TECHNOLOGY AND GROWTH [the-attack-on-technology-and-growth]

The fashionable attack on growth and affluence is palpably an attack by
comfortable, contented upper-class liberals. Enjoying a material
contentment and a living standard undreamt of by even the wealthiest men
of the past, it is easy for upper-class liberals to sneer at
“materialism,” and to call for a freeze on all further economic
advance.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn3)^ For the mass of the world’s
population still living in squalor such a cry for the cessation of
growth is truly obscene; but even in the United States, there is little
evidence of satiety and superabundance. Even the upper-class liberals
themselves have not been conspicuous for making a bonfire of their
salary checks as a contribution to their war on “materialism” and
affluence.

The widespread attack on technology is even more irresponsible. If
technology were to be rolled back to the “tribe” and to the
preindustrial era, the result would be mass starvation and death on a
universal scale. The vast majority of the world’s population is
dependent for its very survival on modern technology and industry. The
North American continent was able to accommodate approximately one
million Indians in the days before Columbus, all living on a subsistence
level. It is now able to accommodate several hundred million people, all
living at an infinitely higher living standard—and the reason is modern
technology and industry. Abolish the latter and we will abolish the
people as well. For all one knows, to our fanatical antipopulationists
this “solution” to the population question may be a good thing, but for
the great majority of us, this would be a draconian “final solution”
indeed.

The irresponsible attack on technology is another liberal flip-flop: it
comes from the same liberal intellectuals who, 30-odd years ago, were
denouncing capitalism for not putting modern technology to full use in
the service of State planning and were calling for absolute rule by a
modern “technocratic” elite. Yet now the very same intellectuals who not
so long ago were yearning for a technocratic dictatorship over all of
our lives are now trying to deprive us of the vital fruits of technology
itself.

Yet the various contradictory phases of liberal thought never completely
die; and many of the same antitechnologists, in a 180-degree reversal of
the automation hysteria, are *also* confidently forecasting
technological stagnation from now on. They cheerily predict a gloomy
future for mankind by assuming that technology will stagnate, and not
continue to improve and accelerate. This is the technique of
pseudoscientific forecasting of the widely touted antigrowth Club of
Rome Report. As Passell, Roberts, and Ross write in their critique of
the report, “If the telephone company were restricted to
turn-of-the-century technology 20 million operators would be needed to
handle today’s volume of calls.” Or, as British editor Norman Macrae has
observed, “an extrapolation of the trends of the 1880s would show
today’s cities buried under horse
manure.”^[4](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn4)^ Or, further:

> While the team’s \[Club of Rome’s\] model hypothesizes exponential
> growth for industrial and agricultural needs, it places arbitrary,
> nonexponential, limits on the technical progress that might
> accommodate these needs. ...
>
> The Rev. Thomas Malthus made a similar point two centuries ago without
> benefit of computer printouts. ... Malthus argued that people tend to
> multiply exponentially, while the food supply at best increases at a
> constant rate. He expected that starvation and war would periodically
> redress the balance. ...
>
> But there is no particular criterion beyond myopia on which to base
> that speculation. Malthus was wrong; food capacity has kept up with
> population. While no one knows for certain, technical progress shows
> no sign of slowing down. The best econometric estimates suggest that
> it is indeed growing exponentially.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn5)^

What we need is more economic growth, not less; more and better
technology, and not the impossible and absurd attempt to scrap
technology and return to the primitive tribe. Improved technology and
greater capital investment will lead to higher living standards for all
and provide greater material comforts, as well as the leisure to pursue
and enjoy the “spiritual” side of life. There is precious little culture
or civilization available for people who must work long hours to eke out
a subsistence living. The real problem is that productive capital
investment is being siphoned off by taxes, restrictions, and government
contracts for unproductive and wasteful government expenditures,
including military and space boondoggling. Furthermore, the precious
technical resource of scientists and engineers is being ever more
intensively diverted to government, instead of to “civilian” consumer
production. What we need is for government to get out of the way, remove
its incubus of taxation and expenditures from the economy, and allow
productive and technical resources once again to devote themselves fully
to increasing the well-being of the mass of consumers. We need growth,
higher living standards, and a technology and capital equipment that
meet consumer wants and demands; but we can only achieve these by
removing the incubus of statism and allowing the energies of all of the
population to express themselves in the free-market economy. We need an
economic and technological growth that emerges freely, as Jane Jacobs
has shown, from the free-market economy, and not the distortions and
wastes imposed upon the world economy from the liberal force-feeding of
the 1950s. We need, in short, a truly free-market, libertarian economy.

## CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES [conservation-of-resources]

As we have mentioned, the selfsame liberals who claim that we have
entered the “postscarcity” age and are in no further need of economic
growth, are in the forefront of the complaint that “capitalist greed” is
destroying our scarce natural resources. The gloom-and-doom soothsayers
of the Club of Rome, for example, by simply extrapolating current trends
of resource use, confidently predict the exhaustion of vital raw
materials within 40 years. But confident—and completely
faulty—predictions of exhaustion of raw materials have been made
countless times in recent centuries.

What the soothsayers have overlooked is the vital role that the
free-market economic mechanism plays in conserving, and adding to,
natural resources. Let us consider, for example, a typical copper mine.
Why has copper ore not been exhausted long before now by the inexorable
demands of our industrial civilization? Why is it that copper miners,
once they have found and opened a vein of ore, do not mine all the
copper immediately; why, instead, do they conserve the copper mine, add
to it, and extract the copper gradually, from year to year? Because the
mine owners realize that, for example, if they triple *this year’s*
production of copper they may indeed triple this year’s income, *but*
they will also be depleting the mine, and therefore the *future* income
they will be able to derive from it. On the market, this loss of future
income is immediately reflected in the monetary value—the price—of the
mine as a whole. This monetary value, reflected in the selling price of
the mine, and then of individual shares of mining stock, is based on the
expected future income to be earned from the production of the copper;
any depletion of the mine, then, will lower the value of the mine and
hence the price of the mining stock. Every mine owner, then, has to
weigh the advantages of immediate income from copper production against
the loss in the “capital value” of the mine as a whole, and hence
against the loss in the value of his shares.

The mine owners’ decisions are determined by their expectations of
future copper yields and demands, the existing and expected rates of
interest, etc. Suppose, for example, that copper is expected to be
rendered obsolete in a few years by a new synthetic metal. In that case,
copper mine owners will rush to produce more copper now when it is more
highly valued, and save less for the future when it will have little
value—thereby benefitting the consumers and the economy as a whole by
producing copper now when it is more intensely needed. But, on the other
hand, if a copper shortage is expected in the future, mine owners will
produce less now and wait to produce more later when copper prices are
higher—thereby benefitting society by producing more in the future when
it will be needed more intensely. Thus, we see that the market economy
contains a marvelous built-in mechanism whereby the decisions of
resource owners on present as against future production will benefit not
only their own income and wealth, but the mass of consumers and the
economy as a whole.

But there is much more to this free-market mechanism: Suppose that a
growing shortage of copper is now expected in the future. The result is
that more copper will be withheld now and saved for future production.
The price of copper now will rise. The increase in copper prices will
have several “conserving” effects. In the first place, the higher price
of copper is a signal to the users of copper that it is scarcer and more
expensive; the copper users will then conserve the use of this more
expensive metal. They will use less copper, substituting cheaper metals
or plastics; and copper will be conserved more fully and saved for those
uses for which there is no satisfactory substitute. Moreover, the
greater cost of copper will stimulate (a) a rush to find new copper
ores; and (b) a search for less expensive substitutes, perhaps by new
technological discoveries. Higher prices for copper will also stimulate
campaigns for saving and recycling the metal. This price mechanism of
the free market is precisely the reason that copper, and other natural
resources, have not disappeared long ago. As Passell, Roberts, and Ross
say in their critique of the Club of Rome:

> Natural resource reserves and needs in the model are calculated
> \[in\]... the absence of prices as a variable in the “Limits”
> projection of how resources will be used. In the real world, rising
> prices act as an economic signal to conserve scarce resources,
> providing incentives to use cheaper materials in their place,
> stimulating research efforts on new ways to save on resource inputs,
> and making renewed exploration attempts more
> profitable.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn6)^

In fact, in contrast to the gloom-and-doomers, raw material and natural
resource prices have remained low, and have generally declined relative
to other prices. To liberal and Marxist intellectuals, this is usually a
sign of capitalist “exploitation” of the underdeveloped countries which
are often the producers of the raw materials. But it is a sign of
something completely different, of the fact that natural resources have
not been growing scarcer but more abundant; hence their relatively lower
cost. The development of cheap substitutes, e.g., plastics, synthetic
fibres, has kept natural resources cheap and abundant. And in a few
decades we can expect that modern technology will develop a remarkably
cheap source of energy—nuclear fusion—a development which will
automatically yield a great abundance of raw materials for the work that
will be needed.

The development of synthetic materials and of cheaper energy highlights
a vital aspect of modern technology the doom-sayers overlook: that
technology and industrial production *create* resources which had never
existed as effective resources. For example, before the development of
the kerosene lamp and especially the automobile, petroleum was not a
resource but an unwanted waste, a giant liquid black “weed.” It was only
the development of modern industry that converted petroleum *into* a
useful resource. Furthermore, modern technology, through improved
geological techniques and through the incentives of the market, has been
*finding* new petroleum reserves at a rapid rate.

Predictions of imminent exhaustion of resources, as we have noted, are
nothing new. In 1908, President Theodore Roosevelt, calling a Governors’
Conference on natural resources, warned of their “imminent exhaustion.”
At the same conference, steel industrialist Andrew Carnegie predicted
the exhaustion of the Lake Superior iron range by 1940, while railroad
magnate James J. Hill forecast the exhaustion of much of our timber
resources in ten years. Not only that: Hill even predicted an imminent
shortage of wheat production in the United States, in a country where we
are still grappling with the wheat *surpluses* generated by our farm
subsidy program. Current forecasts of doom are made on the same basis: a
grievous underweighting of the prospects of modern technology and an
ignorance of the workings of the market
economy.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn7)^

It is true that several particular natural resources have suffered, in
the past and now, from depletion. But in each case the reason has not
been “capitalist greed”; on the contrary, the reason has been the
*failure* of government to allow private property in the resource—in
short, a failure to pursue the logic of private property rights far
enough.

One example has been timber resources. In the American West and in
Canada, most of the forests are owned, not by private owners but by the
federal (or provincial) government. The government then *leases* their
use to private timber companies. In short, private property is permitted
only in the annual *use* of the resource, but not in the forest, the
resource, itself. In this situation, the private timber company does not
own the capital value, and therefore does not have to worry about
depletion of the resource itself. The timber company has no economic
incentive to conserve the resource, replant trees, etc. Its only
incentive is to cut as many trees as quickly as possible, since there is
no economic value to the timber company in maintaining the capital value
of the forest. In Europe, where private ownership of forests is far more
common, there is little complaint of destruction of timber resources.
For wherever private property is allowed in the forest itself, it is to
the benefit of the owner to preserve and restore tree growth while he is
cutting timber, so as to avoid depletion of the forest’s capital
value.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn8)^

Thus, in the United States, a major culprit has been the Forest Service
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which owns forests and leases
annual rights to cut timber, with resulting devastation of the trees. In
contrast, private forests such as those owned by large lumber firms like
Georgia-Pacific and U.S. Plywood scientifically cut and reforest their
trees in order to maintain their future
supply.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn9)^

Another unhappy consequence of the American government’s failure to
allow private property in a resource was the destruction of the Western
grasslands in the late nineteenth century. Every viewer of “Western”
movies is familiar with the mystique of the “open range” and the often
violent “wars” among cattlemen, sheepmen, and farmers over parcels of
ranch land. The “open range” was the failure of the federal government
to apply the policy of homesteading to the changed conditions of the
drier climate west of the Mississippi. In the East, the 160 acres
granted free to homesteading farmers on government land constituted a
viable technological unit for farming in a wetter climate. But in the
dry climate of the West, no successful cattle or sheep ranch could be
organized on a mere 160 acres. But the federal government refused to
expand the 160-acre unit to allow the “home-steading” of larger cattle
ranches. Hence, the “open range,” on which private cattle and sheep
owners were able to roam unchecked on government-owned pasture land. But
this meant that no one owned the pasture, the land itself; it was
therefore to the economic advantage of every cattle or sheep owner to
graze the land and use up the grass as quickly as possible, otherwise
the grass would be grazed by some other sheep or cattle owner. The
result of this tragically shortsighted refusal to allow private property
in grazing land itself was an overgrazing of the land, the ruining of
the grassland by grazing too early in the season, and the failure of
anyone to restore or replant the grass—anyone who bothered to restore
the grass would have had to look on helplessly while someone else grazed
his cattle or sheep. Hence the overgrazing of the West, and the onset of
the “dust bowl.” Hence also the illegal attempts by numerous cattlemen,
farmers, and sheepmen to take the law into their own hands and fence off
the land into private property—and the range wars that often followed.

Professor Samuel P. Hays, in his authoritative account of the
conservation movement in America, writes of the range problem:

> Much of the Western livestock industry depended for its forage upon
> the “open” range, owned by the federal government, but free for anyone
> to use. ... Congress had never provided legislation regulating grazing
> or permitting stockmen to acquire range lands. Cattle and sheepmen
> roamed the public domain. ... Cattlemen fenced range for their
> exclusive use, but competitors cut the wire. Resorting to force and
> violence, sheepherders and cowboys “solved” their disputes over
> grazing lands by slaughtering rival livestock and murdering rival
> stockmen. ... Absence of the most elementary institutions of property
> law created confusion, bitterness, and destruction.
>
> Amid this turmoil the public range rapidly deteriorated. Originally
> plentiful and lush, the forage supply was subjected to intense
> pressure by increasing use. ... The public domain became stocked with
> more animals than the range could support. Since each stockman feared
> that others would beat him to the available forage, he grazed early in
> the year and did not permit the young grass to mature and reseed.
> Under such conditions the quality and quantity of available forage
> rapidly decreased; vigorous perennials gave way to annuals and annuals
> to weeds.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn10)^

Hays concludes that public-domain range lands may have been depleted by
over two-thirds by this process, as compared to their virgin condition.

There is a vitally important area in which the absence of private
property in the resource has been and is causing, not only depletion of
resources, but also a complete failure to develop vast potential
resources. This is the potentially enormously productive *ocean*
resource. The oceans are in the international public domain, i.e., no
person, company, or even national government is allowed property rights
in parts of the ocean. As a result, the oceans have remained in the same
primitive state as was the land in the precivilized days before the
development of agriculture. The way of production for primitive man was
“hunting-and-gathering”: the hunting of wild animals and the gathering
of fruits, berries, nuts, and wild seeds and vegetables. Primitive man
worked passively *within* his environment instead of acting to transform
it; hence he just lived off the land without attempting to remould it.
As a result, the land was unproductive, and only a relatively few
tribesmen could exist at a bare subsistence level. It was only with the
development of agriculture, the farming of the soil, and the
transformation of the land through farming that productivity and living
standards could take giant leaps forward. And it was only with
agriculture that civilization could begin. But to permit the development
of agriculture there had to be private property rights, first in the
fields and crops, and then in the land itself.

With respect to the ocean, however, we are still in the primitive,
unproductive hunting and gathering stage. Anyone can capture fish in the
ocean, or extract its resources, but only on the run, only as hunters
and gatherers. No one can *farm* the ocean, no one can engage in
*aquaculture*. In this way we are deprived of the use of the immense
fish and mineral resources of the seas. For example, if anyone tried to
farm the sea and to increase the productivity of the fisheries by
fertilizers, he would immediately be deprived of the fruits of his
efforts because he could not keep other fishermen from rushing in and
seizing the fish. And so no one tries to fertilize the oceans as the
land is fertilized. Furthermore, there is no economic incentive—in fact,
there is every *dis*incentive—for anyone to engage in technological
research in the ways and means of improving the productivity of the
fisheries, or in extracting the mineral resources of the oceans. There
will only be such incentive when property rights in parts of the ocean
are as fully allowed as property rights in the land. Even now there is a
simple but effective technique that could be used for increasing fish
productivity: parts of the ocean could be fenced off electronically, and
through this readily available electronic fencing, fish could be
segregated by size. By preventing big fish from eating smaller fish, the
production of fish could be increased enormously. And if private
property in parts of the ocean were permitted, a vast flowering of
*aquaculture* would create and multiply ocean resources in numerous ways
we cannot now even foresee.

National governments have tried vainly to cope with the problem of fish
depletion by placing irrational and uneconomic restrictions on the total
size of the catch, or on the length of the allowable season. In the
cases of salmon, tuna, and halibut, technological methods of fishing
have thereby been kept primitive and unproductive by unduly shortening
the season and injuring the quality of the catch and by stimulating
overproduction—and underuse during the year—of the fishing fleets. And
of course such governmental restrictions do nothing at all to stimulate
the growth of aquaculture. As Professors North and Miller write:

> Fishermen are poor because they are forced to use inefficient
> equipment and to fish only a small fraction of the time \[by the
> governmental regulations\] and of course there are far too many of
> them. The consumer pays a much higher price for red salmon than would
> be necessary if efficient methods were used. Despite the ever-growing
> intertwining bonds of regulations, the preservation of the salmon run
> is still not assured.
>
> The root of the problem lies in the current non-ownership arrangement.
> It is not in the interests of any individual fisherman to concern
> himself with perpetuation of the salmon run. Quite the contrary: It is
> rather in his interests to catch as many fish as he can during the
> season.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn11)^

In contrast, North and Miller point out that private property rights in
the ocean, under which the owner would use the least costly and most
efficient technology *and* preserve and make productive the resource
itself, is now more feasible than ever: “The invention of modern
electronic sensing equipment has now made the policing of large bodies
of water relatively cheap and easy.”^[12](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn12)^

The growing international conflicts over parts of the ocean only further
highlight the importance of private property rights in this vital area.
For as the United States and other nations assert their sovereignty 200
miles from their shores, and as private companies and governments
squabble over areas of the ocean; and as trawlers, fishing nets, oil
drillers, and mineral diggers war over the same areas of the
ocean—property rights become increasingly and patently more important.
As Francis Christy writes:

> coal is mined in shafts below the sea floor, oil is drilled from
> platforms fixed to the bottom rising above the water, minerals can be
> dredged from the surface of the ocean bed... sedentary animals are
> scraped from the bed on which telephone cables may lie, bottom feeding
> animals are caught in traps or trawls, mid-water species may be taken
> by hook and line or by trawls which occasionally interfere with
> submarines, surface species are taken by net and harpoon, and the
> surface itself is used for shipping as well as the vessels engaged in
> extracting resources.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn13)^

This growing conflict leads Christy to predict that “the seas are in a
stage of transition. They are moving from a condition in which property
rights are almost nonexistent to a condition in which property rights of
some form will become appropriated or made available.” Eventually,
concludes Christy, “as the sea’s resources become more valuable,
exclusive rights will be acquired.”^[14](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn14)^

## POLLUTION [pollution]

All right: Even if we concede that full private property in resources
and the free market will conserve and create resources, and do it far
better than government regulation, what of the problem of pollution?
Wouldn’t we be suffering aggravated pollution from unchecked “capitalist
greed”?

There is, first of all, this stark empirical fact: Government ownership,
even socialism, has proved to be no solution to the problem of
pollution. Even the most starry-eyed proponents of government planning
concede that the poisoning of Lake Baikal in the Soviet Union is a
monument to heedless industrial pollution of a valuable natural
resource. But there is far more to the problem than that. Note, for
example, the two crucial areas in which pollution has become an
important problem: the air and the waterways, particularly the rivers.
But these are precisely two of the vital areas in society in which
private property has not been permitted to function.

First, the rivers. The rivers, and the oceans too, are generally owned
by the government; private property, certainly complete private
property, has not been permitted in the water. In essence, then,
government owns the rivers. But government ownership is not true
ownership, because the government officials, while able to control the
resource cannot themselves reap their capital value on the market.
Government officials cannot sell the rivers or sell stock in them.
Hence, they have no economic incentive to preserve the purity and value
of the rivers. Rivers are, then, in the economic sense, “unowned”;
therefore government officials have permitted their corruption and
pollution. Anyone has been able to dump polluting garbage and wastes in
the waters. But consider what would happen if private firms were able to
own the rivers and the lakes. If a private firm owned Lake Erie, for
example, then anyone dumping garbage in the lake would be promptly sued
in the courts for their aggression against private property and would be
forced by the courts to pay damages and to cease and desist from any
further aggression. Thus, only private property rights will insure an
end to pollution—invasion of resources. Only because the rivers are
unowned is there no owner to rise up and defend his precious resource
from attack. If, in contrast, anyone should dump garbage or pollutants
into a lake which is privately owned (as are many smaller lakes), he
would not be permitted to do so for very long—the owner would come
roaring to its defense.^[15](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn15)^ Professor
Dolan writes:

> With a General Motors owning the Mississippi River, you can be sure
> that stiff effluent charges would be assessed on industries and
> municipalities along its banks, and that the water would be kept clean
> enough to maximize revenues from leases granted to firms seeking
> rights to drinking water, recreation, and commercial
> fishing.^[16](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn16)^

If government as owner has allowed the pollution of the rivers,
government has also been the single major active polluter, especially in
its role as municipal sewage disposer. There already exist low-cost
chemical toilets which can burn off sewage without polluting air,
ground, or water; but who will invest in chemical toilets when local
governments will dispose of sewage free to their customers?

This example points up a problem similar to the case of the stunting of
aquaculture technology by the absence of private property: if
governments as owners of the rivers permit pollution of water, then
industrial technology will—and has—become a water-polluting technology.
If production processes are allowed to pollute the rivers unchecked by
their owners, then that is the sort of production technology we will
have.

If the problem of water pollution can be cured by private property
rights in water, how about air pollution? How can libertarians possibly
come up with a solution for this grievous problem? Surely, there can’t
be private property in the *air*? But the answer is: yes, there can. We
have already seen how radio and TV frequencies can be privately owned.
So could channels for airlines. Commercial airline routes, for example,
could be privately owned; there is no need for a Civil Aeronautics Board
to parcel out—and restrict—routes between various cities. But in the
case of air pollution we are dealing not so much with private property
*in the air* as with protecting private property in one’s lungs, fields,
and orchards. The vital fact about air pollution is that the polluter
sends unwanted and unbidden pollutants—from smoke to nuclear radiation
to sulfur oxides—*through* the air and into the lungs of innocent
victims, as well as onto their material property. All such emanations
which injure person or property constitute aggression against the
private property of the victims. Air pollution, after all, is just as
much aggression as committing arson against another’s property or
injuring him physically. Air pollution that injures others is aggression
pure and simple. The major function of government—of courts and
police—is to stop aggression; instead, the government has failed in this
task and has failed grievously to exercise its defense function against
air pollution.

It is important to realize that this failure has *not* been a question
purely of ignorance, a simple time lag between recognizing a new
technological problem and facing up to it. For if some of the modern
pollutants have only recently become known, factory smoke and many of
its bad effects have been known ever since the Industrial Revolution,
known to the extent that the American courts, during the late—and as far
back as the early-nineteenth century made the deliberate decision to
allow property rights to be violated by industrial smoke. To do so, the
courts had to—and did—systematically change and weaken the defenses of
property right embedded in Anglo-Saxon common law. Before the mid and
late nineteenth century, any injurious air pollution was considered a
tort, a nuisance against which the victim could sue for damages and
against which he could take out an injunction to cease and desist from
any further invasion of his property rights. But during the nineteenth
century, the courts systematically altered the law of negligence and the
law of nuisance to *permit* any air pollution which was not unusually
greater than any similar manufacturing firm, one that was not more
extensive than the customary practice of fellow polluters.

As factories began to arise and emit smoke, blighting the orchards of
neighboring farmers, the farmers would take the manufacturers to court,
asking for damages and injunctions against further invasion of their
property. But the judges said, in effect, “Sorry. We know that
industrial smoke (i.e., air pollution) invades and interferes with your
property rights. But there is something *more important* than mere
property rights: and that is public policy, the ‘common good.’ And the
common good decrees that industry is a good thing, industrial progress
is a good thing, and therefore your mere private property rights must be
overridden on behalf of the general welfare.” And now all of us are
paying the bitter price for this overriding of private property, in the
form of lung disease and countless other ailments. And all for the
“common good”!^[17](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn17)^

That this principle has guided the courts during the air age as well may
be seen by a decision of the Ohio courts in *Antonik v. Chamberlain*
(1947). The residents of a suburban area near Akron sued to enjoin the
defendants from operating a privately owned airport. The grounds were
invasion of property rights through excessive noise. Refusing the
injunction, the court declared:

> In our business of judging in this case, while sitting as a court of
> equity, we must not only weigh the conflict of interests between the
> airport owner and the nearby landowners, but we must further recognize
> the public policy of the generation in which we live. We must
> recognize that the establishment of an airport... is of great concern
> to the public, and if such an airport is abated, or its establishment
> prevented, the consequences will be not only a serious injury to the
> owner of the port property but may be a serious loss of a valuable
> asset to the entire community.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn18)^

To cap the crimes of the judges, legislatures, federal and state, moved
in to cement the aggression by prohibiting victims of air pollution from
engaging in “class action” suits against polluters. Obviously, if a
factory pollutes the atmosphere of a city where there are tens of
thousands of victims, it is impractical for each victim to sue to
collect his particular damages from the polluter (although an
*injunction* could be used effectively by one small victim). The common
law, therefore, recognizes the validity of “class action” suits, in
which one or a few victims can sue the aggressor not only on their own
behalf, but on behalf of the entire *class* of similar victims. But the
legislatures systematically outlawed such class action suits in
pollution cases. For this reason, a victim may successfully sue a
polluter who injures him individually, in a one-to-one “private
nuisance” suit. But he is prohibited by law from acting against a mass
polluter who is injuring a large number of people in a given area! As
Frank Bubb writes, “It is as if the government were to tell you that it
will (attempt to) protect you from a thief who steals only from you, but
it will not protect you if the thief also steals from everyone else in
the neighborhood.”^[19](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn19)^

*Noise*, too, is a form of air pollution. Noise is the creation of sound
waves which go through the air and then bombard and invade the property
and persons of others. Only recently have physicians begun to
investigate the damaging effects of noise on the human physiology.
Again, a libertarian legal system would permit damage and class action
suits and injunctions against excessive and damaging noise: against
“noise pollution.”

The remedy against air pollution is therefore crystal clear, and it has
nothing to do with multibillion-dollar palliative government programs at
the expense of the taxpayers which do not even meet the real issue. The
remedy is simply for the courts to return to their function of defending
person and property rights against invasion, and therefore to enjoin
anyone from injecting pollutants into the air. But what of the
propollution defenders of industrial progress? And what of the increased
costs that would have to be borne by the consumer? And what of our
present polluting technology?

The argument that such an injunctive prohibition against pollution would
add to the costs of industrial production is as reprehensible as the
pre-Civil War argument that the abolition of slavery would add to the
costs of growing cotton, and that therefore abolition, however morally
correct, was “impractical.” For this means that the polluters are able
to impose all of the high costs of pollution upon those whose lungs and
property rights they have been allowed to invade with impunity.

Furthermore, the cost and technology argument overlooks the vital fact
that if air pollution is allowed to proceed with impunity, there
continues to be no economic incentive to develop a technology that will
*not* pollute. On the contrary, the incentive would continue to cut, as
it has for a century, precisely the other way. Suppose, for example,
that in the days when automobiles and trucks were first being used, the
courts had ruled as follows:

> Ordinarily, we would be opposed to trucks invading people’s lawns as
> an invasion of private property, and we would insist that trucks
> confine themselves to the roads, regardless of traffic congestion. But
> trucks are vitally important to the public welfare, and therefore we
> decree that trucks should be allowed to cross any lawns they wish
> provided they believe that this would ease their traffic problems.

If the courts had ruled in this way, then we would now have a
transportation system in which lawns would be systematically desecrated
by trucks. And any attempt to stop this would be decried in the name of
modern transportation needs! The point is that this is precisely the way
that the courts ruled on air pollution—pollution which is far more
damaging to all of us than trampling on lawns. In this way, the
government gave the green light, from the very start, to a polluting
technology. It is no wonder then that this is precisely the kind of
technology we have. The only remedy is to force the polluting invaders
to stop their invasion, and thereby to redirect technology into
nonpolluting or even antipolluting channels.

Already, even at our necessarily primitive stage in antipollution
technology, techniques have been developed to combat air and noise
pollution. Mufflers can be installed on noisy machines that emit sound
waves precisely contra-cyclical to the waves of the machines, and
thereby can cancel out these racking sounds. Air wastes can even now be
recaptured as they leave the chimney and be recycled to yield products
useful to industry. Thus, sulfur dioxide, a major noxious air pollutant,
can be captured and recycled to produce economically valuable sulfuric
acid.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn20)^ The highly polluting spark
ignition engine will either have to be “cured” by new devices or
replaced altogether by such nonpolluting engines as diesel, gas turbine,
or steam, or by an electric car. And, as libertarian systems engineer
Robert Poole, Jr., points out, the costs of installing the non- or
antipolluting technology would then “ultimately be borne by the
consumers of the firms’ products, i.e., by those who *choose* to
associate with the firm, rather than being passed on to innocent third
parties in the form of pollution (or as
taxes).”^[21](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn21)^

Robert Poole cogently defines pollution “as the transfer of harmful
matter or energy to the person or property of another, without the
latter’s consent.”^[22](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn22)^ The libertarian—and
the only complete—solution to the problem of air pollution is to use the
courts and the legal structure to combat and prevent such invasion.
There are recent signs that the legal system is beginning to change in
this direction: new judicial decisions and repeal of laws disallowing
class action suits. But this is only a
beginning.^[23](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn23)^

Among conservatives—in contrast to libertarians—there are two ultimately
similar responses to the problem of air pollution. One response, by Ayn
Rand and Robert Moses among others, is to deny that the problem exists,
and to attribute the entire agitation to leftists who want to destroy
capitalism and technology on behalf of a tribal form of socialism. While
part of this charge may be correct, denial of the very existence of the
problem is to deny science itself and to give a vital hostage to the
leftist charge that defenders of capitalism “place property rights above
human rights.” Moreover, a defense of air pollution does not even defend
property rights; on the contrary, it puts these conservatives’ stamp of
approval on those industrialists who are trampling upon the property
rights of the mass of the citizenry.

A second, and more sophisticated, conservative response is by such
free-market economists as Milton Friedman. The Friedmanites concede the
existence of air pollution but propose to meet it, *not* by a defense of
property rights, but rather by a supposedly utilitarian “cost-benefit”
calculation by government, which will then make and enforce a “social
decision” on *how much* pollution to allow. This decision would then be
enforced either by licensing a given amount of pollution (the granting
of “pollution rights”), by a graded scale of taxes against it, or by the
taxpayers paying firms *not* to pollute. Not only would these proposals
grant an enormous amount of bureaucratic power to government in the name
of safeguarding the “free market”; they would continue to override
property rights in the name of a collective decision enforced by the
State. This is far from any genuine “free market,” and reveals that, as
in many other economic areas, it is impossible to *really* defend
freedom and the free market without insisting on defending the rights of
private property. Friedman’s grotesque dictum that those urban
inhabitants who don’t wish to contract emphysema should move to the
country is starkly reminiscent of Marie Antoinette’s famous “Let them
eat cake”—and reveals a lack of sensitivity to human or property rights.
Friedman’s statement, in fact, is of a piece with the typically
conservative, “If you don’t like it here, leave,” a statement that
implies that the government rightly owns the entire land area of “here,”
and that anyone who objects to its rule must therefore leave the area.
Robert Poole’s libertarian critique of the Friedmanite proposals offers
a refreshing contrast:

> Unfortunately, it is an example of the most serious failing of the
> conservative economists: nowhere in the proposal is there any mention
> of *rights*. This is the same failing that has undercut advocates of
> capitalism for 200 years. Even today, the term “laissez-faire” is apt
> to bring forth images of eighteenth century English factory towns
> engulfed in smoke and grimy with soot. The early capitalists agreed
> with the courts that smoke and soot were the “price” that must be paid
> for the benefits of industry. ... Yet laissez-faire without rights is
> a contradiction in terms; the laissez-faire position is based on and
> derived from man’s rights, and can endure only when rights are held
> inviolable. Now, in an age of increasing awareness of the environment,
> this old contradiction is coming back to haunt capitalism.
>
> It is *true* that air is a scarce resource \[as the Friedmanites
> say\], but one must then ask *why* it is scarce. If it is scarce
> because of a systematic violation of rights, then the solution is not
> to raise the price of the status quo, thereby sanctioning the
> rights-violations, but to assert the rights and demand that they be
> protected. ... When a factory discharges a great quantity of sulfur
> dioxide molecules that enter someone’s lungs and cause pulmonary
> edema, the factory owners have aggressed against him as much as if
> they had broken his leg. The point must be emphasized because it is
> vital to the libertarian laissez-faire position. A laissez-faire
> polluter is a contradiction in terms and must be identified as such. A
> libertarian society would be a *full-liability* society, where
> everyone is fully responsible for his actions and any harmful
> consequences they might cause.^[24](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn24)^

In addition to betraying its presumed function of defending private
property, government has contributed to air pollution in a more positive
sense. It was not so long ago that the Department of Agriculture
conducted mass sprayings of DDT by helicopter over large areas,
overriding the wishes of individual objecting farmers. It *still*
continues to pour tons of poisonous and carcinogenic insecticides all
over the South in an expensive and vain attempt to eradicate the fire
ant.^[25](#24-notes.html#chap13_fn25)^ And the Atomic Energy Commission
has poured radioactive wastes into the air and into the ground by means
of its nuclear power plants, and through atomic testing. Municipal power
and water plants, and the plants of licensed monopoly utility companies,
mightily pollute the atmosphere. One of the major tasks of the State in
this area is therefore to stop its *own* poisoning of the atmosphere.

Thus, when we peel away the confusions and the unsound philosophy of the
modern ecologists, we find an important bedrock case against the
existing system; but the case turns out to be not against capitalism,
private property, growth, or technology per se. It is a case against the
failure of government to allow and to defend the rights of private
property against invasion. If property rights were to be defended fully,
against private and governmental invasion alike, we would find here, as
in other areas of our economy and society, that private enterprise and
modern technology would come to mankind not as a curse but as its
salvation.

# 14 WAR AND FOREIGN POLICY [21-chap14.html#page329]

## “ISOLATIONISM,” LEFT AND RIGHT [isolationism-left-and-right]

“Isolationism” was coined as a smear term to apply to opponents of
American entry into World War II. Since the word was often applied
through guilt-by-association to mean pro-Nazi, “isolationist” took on a
“right wing” as well as a generally negative flavor. If not actively
pro-Nazi, “isolationists” were at the very least narrow-minded
ignoramuses ignorant of the world around them, in contrast to the
sophisticated, worldly, *caring* “internationalists” who favored
American crusading around the globe. in the last decade, of course,
antiwar forces have been considered “leftists,” and interventionists
from Lyndon Johnson to Jimmy Carter and their followers have constantly
tried to pin the “isolationist” or at least “neoisolationist” label on
today’s left wing.

Left or right? During World War I, opponents of the war were bitterly
attacked, just as now, as “leftists,” even though they included in their
ranks libertarians and advocates of laissez-faire capitalism. In fact,
the major center of opposition to the American war with spain and the
American war to crush the Philippine rebellion at the turn of the
century was laissez-faire liberals, men like the sociologist and
economist William Graham Sumner, and the Boston merchant Edward
Atkinson, who founded the “Anti-Imperialist League.” Furthermore,
Atkinson and Sumner were squarely in the great tradition of the
classical English liberals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
and in particular such laissez-faire “extremists” as Richard Cobden and
John Bright of the “Manchester School.” Cobden and Bright took the lead
in vigorously opposing every British war and foreign political
intervention of their era and for his pains Cobden was known not as an
“isolationist” but as the “International
Man.”^[1](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn1)^ Until the smear campaign of the
late 1930s, opponents of war were considered the true
“internationalists,” men who opposed the aggrandizement of the
nation-state and favored peace, free trade, free migration and peaceful
cultural exchanges among peoples of all nations. Foreign intervention is
“international” only in the sense that war is international: coercion,
whether the threat of force or the outright movement of troops, will
always cross frontiers between one nation and another.

“Isolationism” has a right-wing sound; “neutralism” and “peaceful
coexistence” sound leftish. But their essence is the same: opposition to
war and political intervention between countries. This has been the
position of antiwar forces for two centuries, whether they were the
classical liberals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the
“leftists” of World War I and the Cold War, or the “rightists” of World
War II. In very few cases have these anti-interventionists favored
literal “isolation”: what they have generally favored is political
nonintervention in the affairs of other countries, coupled with economic
and cultural internationalism in the sense of peaceful freedom of trade,
investment, and interchange between the citizens of all countries. And
this is the essence of the libertarian position as well.

## LIMITING GOVERNMENT [limiting-government]

Libertarians favor the abolition of all States everywhere, and the
provision of legitimate functions now supplied poorly by governments
(police, courts, etc.) by means of the free market. Libertarians favor
liberty as a natural human right, and advocate it not only for Americans
but for all peoples. In a purely libertarian world, therefore, there
would be no “foreign policy” because there would be no States, no
governments with a monopoly of coercion over particular territorial
areas. But since we live in a world of nation-states, and since this
system is hardly likely to disappear in the near future, what is the
attitude of libertarians toward foreign policy in the current
State-ridden world?

Pending the dissolution of States, libertarians desire to *limit*, to
whittle down, the area of government power in all directions and as much
as possible. We have already demonstrated how this principle of
“de-statizing” might work in various important “domestic” problems,
where the goal is to push back the role of government and to allow the
voluntary and spontaneous energies of free persons full scope through
peaceful interaction, notably in the free-market economy. In foreign
affairs, the goal is the same: to keep government from interfering in
the affairs of other governments or other countries. Political
“isolationism” and peaceful coexistence—refraining from acting upon
other countries—is, then, the libertarian counterpart to agitating for
laissez-faire policies at home. The idea is to shackle government from
acting abroad just as we try to shackle government at home. Isolationism
or peaceful coexistence is the foreign policy counterpart of severely
limiting government at home.

Specifically, the entire land area of the world is now parcelled out
among various States, and each land area is ruled by a central
government with monopoly of violence over that area. In relations
between States, then, the libertarian goal is to keep each of these
States from extending their violence to other countries, so that each
State’s tyranny is at least confined to its own bailiwick. For the
libertarian is interested in reducing as much as possible the area of
State aggression against all private individuals. The only way to do
this, in international affairs, is for the people of each country to
pressure their own State to confine its activities to the area it
monopolizes and not to attack other States or aggress against their
subjects. In short, the objective of the libertarian is to confine any
existing State to as small a degree of invasion of person and property
as possible. And this means the total avoidance of war. The people under
each State should pressure “their” respective States not to attack one
another, or, if a conflict should break out, to withdraw from it as
quickly as physically possible.

Let us assume for the moment, a world with two hypothetical countries:
Graustark and Belgravia. Each is ruled by its own State. What happens if
the government of Graustark invades the territory of Belgravia? From the
libertarian point of view two evils immediately occur. First, the
Graustark Army begins to slaughter innocent Belgravian civilians,
persons who are not implicated in whatever crimes the Belgravian
government might have committed. War, then, is mass murder, and this
massive invasion of the right to life, of self-ownership, of numbers of
people is not only a crime but, for the libertarian, the ultimate crime.
Second, since all governments obtain their revenue from the thievery of
coercive taxation, any mobilization and launching of troops inevitably
involve an increase in tax-coercion in Graustark. For both
reasons—because inter-State wars inevitably involve both mass murder and
an increase in tax-coercion, the libertarian opposes war. Period.

It was not always thus. During the Middle Ages, the scope of wars was
far more limited. Before the rise of modern weapons, armaments were so
limited that governments could—and often *did*—strictly confine their
violence to the *armies* of the rival governments. It is true that
tax-coercion increased, but at least there was no mass murder of the
innocents. Not only was firepower low enough to confine violence to the
armies of the contending sides, but in the premodern era there was no
central nation-state that spoke inevitably in the name of all
inhabitants of a given land area. If one set of kings or barons fought
another, it was not felt that everyone in the area must be a dedicated
partisan. Moreover, instead of mass conscript armies enslaved to their
respective rulers, armies were small bands of hired mercenaries. Often,
a favorite sport for the populace was to observe a battle from the
safety of the town ramparts, and war was regarded as something of a
sporting match. But with the rise of the centralizing State and of
modern weapons of mass destruction, the slaughter of civilians, as well
as conscript armies, have become a vital part of inter-State warfare.

Suppose that despite possible libertarian opposition, war has broken
out. Clearly, the libertarian position should be that, so long as the
war continues, the scope of assault upon innocent civilians must be
diminished as much as possible. Old-fashioned international law had two
excellent devices to accomplish this goal: the “laws of war,” and the
“laws of neutrality” or “neutrals’ rights.” The laws of neutrality were
designed to keep any war confined to the warring States themselves,
without attacks upon nonwarring States and, particularly, aggression
against the peoples of other nations. Hence the importance of such
ancient and now almost forgotten American principles as “freedom of the
seas” or severe limitations upon the rights of warring States to
blockade neutral trade with the enemy country. In short, the libertarian
tries to induce neutral States to *remain* neutral in any inter-State
conflict, and to induce the warring States to observe fully the rights
of neutral citizens. The “laws of war,” for their part, were designed to
limit as much as possible the invasion by warring States of the rights
of civilians in their respective countries. As the British jurist F.J.P.
Veale put it:

> The fundamental principle of this code was that hostilities between
> civilized peoples must be limited to the armed forces actually
> engaged. ... It drew a distinction between combatants and
> non-combatants by laying down that the sole business of the combatants
> is to fight each other and, consequently, that non-combatants must be
> excluded from the scope of military
> operations.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn2)^

In the modified form of prohibiting the bombardment of all cities not in
the front line, this rule held in Western European wars in recent
centuries until Britain launched the strategic bombing of civilians in
World War II. Now, of course, the entire concept is scarcely remembered,
since the very nature of modern nuclear warfare rests upon the
annihilation of civilians.

To return to our hypothetical Graustark and Belgravia, suppose that
Graustark has invaded Belgravia, and that a third government, Walldavia,
now leaps into the war in order to defend Belgravia against
“Graustarkian aggression.” Is this action justifiable? Here, indeed, is
the germ of the pernicious twentieth-century theory of “collective
security”—the idea that when one government “aggresses” against another,
it is the moral obligation of the other governments of the world to band
together to defend the “victimized” State.

There are several fatal flaws in this concept of collective security
against “aggression.” One is that when Walldavia, or any other States,
leap into the fray they are themselves expanding and compounding the
extent of the aggression, because they are (1) unjustly slaughtering
masses of Graustarkian civilians, and (2) increasing tax-coercion over
Walldavian citizens. Furthermore, (3) in this age when States and
subjects are closely identifiable, Walldavia is thereby leaving
Walldavian civilians open to retaliation by Graustarkian bombers or
missiles. Thus, entry into the war by the Walldavian government puts
into jeopardy the very lives and properties of Walldavian citizens which
the government is *supposed* to be protecting. Finally, (4)
conscription-enslavement of Walldavian citizens will usually intensify.

If this kind of “collective security” should really be applied on a
worldwide scale, with all the “Walldavias” rushing into every local
conflict and escalating them, every local skirmish would soon be raised
into a global conflagration.

There is another crucial flaw in the collective security concept. The
idea of entering a war in order to stop “aggression” is clearly an
analogy from aggression by one *individual* upon another. Smith is seen
to be beating up Jones—aggressing against him. Nearby police then rush
to the defense of the victim Jones; they are using “police action” to
stop aggression. It was in pursuit of this myth, for example, that
President Truman persisted in referring to American entry into the
Korean war as a “police action,” a collective UN effort to repel
“aggression.”

But “aggression” only makes sense on the individual Smith-Jones level,
as does the very term “police action.” These terms make no sense
whatever on an inter-State level. First, we have seen that governments
entering a war thereby become aggressors themselves against innocent
civilians; indeed, become mass murderers. The *correct* analogy to
individual action would be: Smith beats up Jones, the police rush in to
help Jones, and in the course of trying to apprehend Smith, the police
bomb a city block and murder thousands of people, or spray machine-gun
fire into an innocent crowd. *This* is a far more accurate analogy, for
that is what a warring government does, and in the twentieth century it
does so on a monumental scale. But any police agency that behaves this
way *itself* becomes a criminal aggressor, often far more so than the
original Smith who began the affair.

But there is yet another fatal flaw in the analogy with individual
aggression. When Smith beats up Jones or steals his property we can
identify Smith as an aggressor upon the personal or property right of
his victim. But when the Graustarkian State invades the territory of the
Belgravian State, it is impermissible to refer to “aggression” in an
analogous way. For the libertarian, no government has a just claim to
any property or “sovereignty” right in a given territorial area. The
Belgravian State’s claim to its territory is therefore totally different
from Mr. Jones’s claim to his property (although the latter might also,
on investigation, turn out to be the illegitimate result of theft). No
State has any legitimate property; all of its territory is the result of
some kind of aggression and violent conquest. Hence the Graustarkian
State’s invasion is necessarily a battle between two sets of thieves and
aggressors: the only problem is that innocent civilians on both sides
are being trampled upon.

Aside from this general caveat on governments, the so-called “aggressor”
State often has a quite plausible claim on its “victim”; plausible, that
is, within the context of the nation-state system. Suppose that
Graustark has crossed the Belgravian border because Belgravia had, a
century earlier, invaded Graustark and seized its northeastern
provinces. The inhabitants of these provinces are culturally,
ethnically, and linguistically Graustarkian. Graustark now invades in
order to be reunited at last with its fellow Graustarkians. In this
situation, by the way, the libertarian, while condemning both
governments for making war and killing civilians, would have to side
with Graustark as having the more just, or the less unjust, claim. Let
us put it this way: In the unlikely event that the two countries could
return to premodern warfare, with (a) weapons limited so that no
civilians were injured in their persons or property; (b) volunteer
rather than conscript armies; and also (c) financing by voluntary
methods instead of taxation; the libertarian could then, given our
context, side unreservedly with Graustark.

Of all the recent wars, none has come closer—though not completely so—to
satisfying these three criteria for a “just war” than the Indian war of
late 1971 for the liberation of Bangla Desh. The government of Pakistan
had been created as a last terrible legacy of Imperial Britain to the
Indian subcontinent. In particular, the nation of Pakistan consisted of
imperial rule by the Punjabis of West Pakistan over the more numerous
and productive Bengalis of East Pakistan (and also over the Pathans of
the North-West Frontier). The Bengalis had long been yearning for
independence from their imperial oppressors; in early 1971, parliament
was suspended as a result of Bengali victory in the elections; from then
on, Punjabi troops systematically slaughtered the civilian Bengal
population. Indian entry into the conflict aided the popular Bengali
resistance forces of the Mukhti Bahini. While taxes and conscription
were, of course, involved, the Indian armies did not use their weapons
against Bengali civilians; on the contrary, here was a genuine
revolutionary war of the Bengali public *against* a Punjabi occupying
State. Only Punjabi soldiers were on the receiving end of Indian
bullets.

This example points up another characteristic of warfare: that
revolutionary guerrilla war *can be* far more consistent with
libertarian principles than any inter-State war. By the very nature of
their activities, guerrillas defend the civilian population *against*
the depredations of a State; hence, guerrillas, inhabiting as they do
the same country as the enemy State, *cannot* use nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction. Further: since guerrillas rely for victory
on the support and aid of the civilian population, they *must*, as a
basic part of their strategy, spare civilians from harm and pinpoint
their activities solely against the State apparatus and its armed
forces. Hence, guerrilla war returns us to the ancient and honorable
virtue of pinpointing the enemy and sparing innocent civilians. And
guerrillas, as part of their quest for enthusiastic civilian support,
often refrain from conscription and taxation and rely on voluntary
support for men and materiel.

The libertarian qualities of guerrilla warfare reside only on the
revolutionary side; for the counterrevolutionary forces of the State, it
is quite a different story. While the State cannot go to the length of
“nuking” its own subjects, it does, of necessity, rely primarily on
campaigns of mass terror: killing, terrorizing, and rounding up the mass
of civilians. Since guerrillas, to be successful, must be supported by
the bulk of the population, the State, in order to wage its war, must
concentrate on destroying that population, or must herd masses of
civilians into concentration camps in order to separate them from their
guerrilla allies. This tactic was used by the Spanish general, “Butcher”
Weyler, against the Cuban rebels in the 1890s, was continued by the
American troops in the Philippines, and by the British in the Boer War,
and continues to be used down to the recent ill-fated “strategic hamlet”
policy in South Vietnam.

The libertarian foreign policy, then, is *not* a pacifist policy. We do
not hold, as do the pacifists, that no individual has the right to use
violence in defending himself against violent attack. What we *do* hold
is that no one has the right to conscript, tax, or murder others, or to
use violence against others in order to defend himself. Since all States
exist and have their being in aggression against their subjects and in
the acquiring of their present territory, and since inter-State wars
slaughter innocent civilians, such wars are always unjust—although some
may be more unjust than others. Guerrilla warfare against States at
least has the potential for meeting libertarian requirements by
pinpointing the guerrilla’s battle against State officials and armies,
and by their use of voluntary methods to staff and finance their
struggle.

## AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY [american-foreign-policy]

We have seen that libertarians have as their prime responsibility the
focussing on the invasions and aggressions of their *own* State. The
libertarians of Graustark must center their attentions on attempting to
limit and whittle down the Graustark State, the Walldavian libertarians
must try to check the Walldavian State, and so on. In foreign affairs,
the libertarians of every country must press *their* government to
refrain from war and foreign intervention, and to withdraw from any war
in which they may be engaged. If for no other reason, then, libertarians
in the United States must center their critical attention on the
imperial and warlike activities of their own government.

But there are still other reasons for libertarians here to focus upon
the invasions and foreign interventions of the United States. For
empirically, taking the twentieth century as a whole, the single most
warlike, most interventionist, most imperialist government has been the
United States. Such a statement is bound to shock Americans, subject as
we have been for decades to intense propaganda by the Establishment on
the invariable saintliness, peaceful intentions, and devotion to justice
of the American government in foreign affairs.

The expansionist impulse of the American State began to take increasing
hold in the late nineteenth century, leaping boldly overseas with
America’s war against Spain, dominating Cuba, grabbing Puerto Rico and
the Philippines, and brutally suppressing a Filipino rebellion for
independence. The imperial expansion of the United States reached full
flower in World War I, when President Woodrow Wilson’s leap into the
fray prolonged the war and the mass slaughter, and unwittingly bred the
grisly devastation that led directly to the Bolshevik triumph in Russia
and the Nazi victory in Germany. It was Wilson’s particular genius to
supply a pietistic and moralistic cloak for a new American policy of
worldwide intervention and domination, a policy of trying to mould every
country in the American image, suppressing radical or Marxist regimes on
the one hand and old-fashioned monarchist governments on the other. It
was Woodrow Wilson who was to fix the broad features of American foreign
policy for the rest of this century. Almost every succeeding President
has considered himself a Wilsonian and followed his policies. It was no
accident that both Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt—so long
thought of as polar opposites—played important roles in America’s first
global crusade of World War I, and that both men harked back to their
experience in World War I intervention and planning as the guideposts
for their future foreign and domestic policies. And it was one of
Richard Nixon’s first acts as President to place Woodrow Wilson’s
picture upon his desk.

In the name of “national self-determination” and “collective security”
against aggression, the American government has consistently pursued a
goal and a policy of world domination and of the forcible suppression of
any rebellion against the status quo anywhere in the world. In the name
of combatting “aggression” everywhere—of being the world’s
“policeman”—it has itself become a great and continuing aggressor.

Anyone who balks at such a description of American policy should simply
consider what the typical American reaction is to *any* domestic or
foreign crisis anywhere on the globe, even at some remote site that
cannot by any stretch of the imagination be considered a direct or even
indirect threat to the lives and security of the American people. The
military dictator of “Bumblestan” is in danger; perhaps his subjects are
tired of being exploited by him and his colleagues. The United States
then becomes gravely concerned; articles by journalists friendly to the
State Department or the Pentagon spread the alarm about what might
happen to the “stability” of Bumblestan and its surrounding area if the
dictator should be toppled. For it so happens that he is a
“pro-American” or “pro-Western” dictator: that is, he is one of “ours”
instead of “theirs.” Millions or even billions of dollars’ worth of
military and economic aid are then rushed by the United States to prop
up the Bumblestani field marshal. If “our” dictator is saved, then a
sigh of relief is heaved, and congratulations are passed around at the
saving of “our” State. The continuing or intensified oppression of the
American taxpayer and of the Bumblestanian citizens are, of course, not
considered in the equation. Or if it should happen that the Bumblestani
dictator may fall, hysteria might hit the American press and officialdom
for the moment. But then, after a while, the American people seem to be
able to live their lives after “losing” Bumblestan about as well as
before—perhaps even better, if it means a few billion less in foreign
aid extracted from them to prop up the Bumblestani State.

If it is understood and expected, then, that the United States will try
to impose its will on every crisis everywhere in the world, then this is
clear indication that America is the great interventionary and imperial
power. The one place where the United States does not now attempt to
work its will is the Soviet Union and the Communist countries—but, of
course, it has tried to do so in the past. Woodrow Wilson, along with
Britain and France, tried for several years to crush bolshevism in the
cradle, with American and Allied troops being sent to Russia to aid the
Czarist (“White”) forces in trying to defeat the Reds. After World War
II, the United States tried its best to oust the Soviets from Eastern
Europe, and succeeded in pushing them out of Azerbaijan in northwestern
Iran. It also helped the British to crush a Communist regime in Greece.
The United States tried its best to maintain Chiang Kai-shek’s
dictatorial rule in China, flying many of Chiang’s troops northward to
occupy Manchuria as the Russians pulled out after World War II; and it
continues to prevent the Chinese from occupying their offshore islands,
Quemoy and Matsu. After virtually installing the dictator Batista in
Cuba, the United States tried desperately to oust the Communist Castro
regime, by actions ranging from the CIA-engineered Bay of Pigs invasion
to CIA-Mafia attempts to assassinate Castro.

Of all America’s recent wars, certainly the most traumatic for Americans
and their attitude toward foreign policy was the Vietnam war. America’s
imperial war in Vietnam was, indeed, a microcosm of what has been
tragically wrong with American foreign policy in this century. American
intervention in Vietnam did not begin, as most people believe, with
Kennedy or Eisenhower or even Truman. It began no later than the date
when the American government, under Franklin Roosevelt, on November 26,
1941, delivered a sharp and insulting ultimatum to Japan to get its
armed forces out of China and Indochina, from what would later be
Vietnam. This U.S. ultimatum set the stage inevitably for Pearl Harbor.
Engaged in a war in the Pacific to oust Japan from the Asian continent,
the United States and its OSS (predecessor to the CIA) favored and aided
Ho Chi Minh’s Communist-run national resistance movement against the
Japanese. After World War II, the Communist Viet Minh was in charge of
all northern Vietnam. But then France, previously the imperial ruler of
Vietnam, betrayed its agreement with Ho and massacred Viet Minh forces.
In this double cross, France was aided by Britain and the United States.

When the French lost to the reconstituted Viet Minh guerrilla movement
under Ho, the United States endorsed the Geneva agreement of 1954, under
which Vietnam was to be quickly reunited as one nation. For it was
generally recognized that the postwar occupation divisions of the
country into North and South were purely arbitrary and merely for
military convenience. But, having by trickery managed to oust the Viet
Minh from the southern half of Vietnam, the United States proceeded to
break the Geneva agreement and to replace the French and their puppet
Emperor Bao Dai by its own clients, Ngo Dinh Diem and his family, who
were installed in dictatorial rule over South Vietnam. When Diem became
an embarrassment, the CIA engineered a coup to assassinate Diem and
replace him with another dictatorial regime. To suppress the Viet Cong,
the Communist-led national independence movement in the South, the
United States rained devastation on South and North Vietnam
alike—bombing and murdering a million Vietnamese and dragging half a
million American soldiers into the quagmires and jungles of Vietnam.

Throughout the tragic Vietnamese conflict, the United States maintained
the fiction that it was a war of “aggression” by the Communist North
Vietnamese State against a friendly and “pro-Western” (whatever that
term may mean) South Vietnamese State which had called for our aid.
Actually, the war was really a doomed but lengthy attempt by an imperial
United States to suppress the wishes of the great bulk of the Vietnamese
population and to maintain unpopular client dictators in the southern
half of the country, by virtual genocide if necessary.

Americans are not accustomed to applying the term “imperialism” to the
actions of the U.S. government, but the word is a particularly apt one.
In its broadest sense, *imperialism* may be defined as aggression by
State A against the people of country B, followed by the subsequent
coercive maintenance of such foreign rule. In our example above, the
permanent rule by the Graustark State over formerly northeastern
Belgravia would be an example of such imperialism. But imperialism does
not have to take the form of direct rule over the foreign population. In
the twentieth century, the indirect form of “neoimperialism” has
increasingly replaced the old-fashioned direct kind; it is more subtle
and less visible but no less effective a form of imperialism. In this
situation, the imperial State rules the foreign population through its
effective control over native client-rulers. This version of modern
Western imperialism has been trenchantly defined by the libertarian
historian Leonard Liggio:

> The imperialist power of the Western countries... imposed on the
> world’s peoples a double or reinforced system of
> exploitation—imperialism—by which the power of the Western governments
> maintains the local ruling class in exchange for the opportunity to
> superimpose Western exploitation upon existing exploitation by local
> states.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn3)^

This view of America as a long-time imperial world power has taken hold
among historians in recent years as the result of compelling and
scholarly work by a distinguished group of New Left revisionist
historians inspired by Professor William Appleman Williams. But this was
also the view of conservative as well as classical liberal
“isolationists” during World War II and in the early days of the Cold
War.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn4)^

## ISOLATIONIST CRITICISMS [isolationist-criticisms]

The last anti-interventionist and anti-imperialist thrust of the old
conservative and classical liberal isolationists came during the Korean
War. Conservative George Morgenstern, chief editorial writer of the
*Chicago Tribune* and author of the first revisionist book on Pearl
Harbor, published an article in the right-wing Washington weekly *Human
Events*, which detailed the grisly imperialist record of the United
States government from the Spanish-American War down to Korea.
Morgenstern noted that the “exalted nonsense” by which President
McKinley had justified the war against Spain was

> familiar to anyone who later attended the evangelical rationalizations
> of Wilson for intervening in the European war, of Roosevelt promising
> the millennium... of Eisenhower treasuring the “crusade in Europe”
> that somehow went sour, or of Truman, Stevenson, Paul Douglas or the
> *New York Times* preaching the holy war in
> Korea.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn5)^

In a widely noted speech at the height of the American defeat in North
Korea at the hands of the Chinese in late 1950, conservative
isolationist Joseph P. Kennedy called for U.S. withdrawal from Korea.
Kennedy proclaimed that “I naturally opposed Communism but I said if
portions of Europe or Asia wish to go Communistic or even have Communism
thrust upon them, we cannot stop it.” The result of the Cold War, the
Truman Doctrine, and the Marshall Plan, Kennedy charged, was disaster—a
failure to purchase friends and a threat of land war in Europe or Asia.
Kennedy warned that:

> half of this world will never submit to dictation by the other half.
> ... What business is it of ours to support French colonial policy in
> Indo-China or to achieve Mr. Syngman Rhee’s concepts of democracy in
> Korea? Shall we now send the Marines into the mountains of Tibet to
> keep the Dalai Lama on his throne?

Economically, Kennedy added, we have been burdening ourselves with
unnecessary debts as a consequence of Cold War policy. If we continue to
weaken our economy “with lavish spending either on foreign nations or in
foreign wars, we run the danger of precipitating another 1932 and of
destroying the very system which we are trying to save.”

Kennedy concluded that the only rational alternative for America is to
scrap the Cold War foreign policy altogether: “to get out of Korea” and
out of Berlin and Europe. The United States could not possibly contain
Russian armies if they chose to march through Europe, and if Europe
should then turn Communist, Communism

> may break of itself as a unified force. ... The more people that it
> will have to govern, the more necessary it becomes for those who
> govern to justify themselves to those being governed. The more peoples
> that are under its yoke, the greater are the possibilities of revolt.

And here, at a time when cold warriors were forecasting a world
Communist monolith as an eternal fact of life, Joseph Kennedy cited
Marshall Tito as pointing the way for the eventual breakup of the
Communist world: thus, “Mao in China is not likely to take his orders
from Stalin.”

Kennedy realized that

> this policy will, of course, be criticized as appeasement. \[But\]...
> is it appeasement to withdraw from unwise commitments. ... If it is
> wise in our interest not to make commitments that endanger our
> security, and this is appeasement, then I am for appeasement.

Kennedy concluded that “the suggestions I make \[would\] conserve
American lives for American ends, not waste them in the freezing hills
of Korea or on the battlescarred plains of Western
Germany.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn6)^

One of the most trenchant and forceful attacks on American foreign
policy to emerge from the Korean War was leveled by the veteran
classical liberal journalist, Garet Garrett. Garrett began his pamphlet,
*The Rise of Empire* (1952), by declaring, “We have crossed the boundary
that lies between Republic and Empire.” Explicitly linking this thesis
with his notable pamphlet of the 1930s, *The Revolution Was*, which had
denounced the advent of executive and statist tyranny within the
republican form under the New Deal, Garrett once more saw a “revolution
within the form” of the old constitutional republic. Garrett, for
example, called Truman’s intervention in Korea without a declaration of
war a “usurpation” of congressional power.

In his pamphlet, Garrett adumbrated the criteria, the hallmarks for the
existence of Empire. The first is the dominance of the executive power,
a dominance reflected in the President’s unauthorized intervention in
Korea. The second is the subordination of domestic to foreign policy;
the third, the “ascendancy of the military mind”; the fourth, a “system
of satellite nations”; and the fifth, “a complex of vaunting and fear,”
a vaunting of unlimited national might combined with a continuing fear,
fear of the enemy, of the “barbarian,” and of the unreliability of the
satellite allies. Garrett found each one of these criteria to apply
fully to the United States.

Having discovered that the United States had developed all the hallmarks
of empire, Garrett added that the United States, like previous empires,
feels itself to be “a prisoner of history.” For beyond fear lies
“collective security,” and the playing of the supposedly destined
American role upon the world stage. Garrett concluded:

It is our turn.

Our turn to do what?

Our turn to assume the responsibilities of moral leadership in the
world,

Our turn to maintain a balance of power against the forces of evil
everywhere—in Europe and Asia and Africa, in the Atlantic and in the
Pacific, by air and by sea—evil in this case being the Russian
barbarian.

Our turn to keep the peace of the world.

Our turn to save civilization.

Our turn to serve mankind.

But this is the language of Empire. The Roman Empire never doubted that
it was the defender of civilization. Its good intentions were peace, law
and order. The Spanish Empire added salvation. The British Empire added
the noble myth of the white man’s burden. We have added freedom and
democracy. Yet the more that may be added to it the more it is the same
language still. A language of power.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn7)^

## WAR AS THE HEALTH OF THE STATE [war-as-the-health-of-the-state]

Many libertarians are uncomfortable with foreign policy matters and
prefer to spend their energies either on fundamental questions of
libertarian theory or on such “domestic” concerns as the free market or
privatizing postal service or garbage disposal. Yet an attack on war or
a warlike foreign policy is of crucial importance to libertarians. There
are two important reasons. One has become a cliché, but is all too true
nevertheless: the overriding importance of preventing a nuclear
holocaust. To all the long-standing reasons, moral and economic, against
an interventionist foreign policy has now been added the imminent,
ever-present threat of world destruction. If the world should be
destroyed, all the other problems and all the other isms—socialism,
capitalism, liberalism, or libertarianism—would be of no importance
whatsoever. Hence the prime importance of a peaceful foreign policy and
of ending the nuclear threat.

The other reason is that, apart from the nuclear menace, war, in the
words of the libertarian Randolph Bourne, “is the health of the State.”
War has always been the occasion of a great—and usually
permanent—acceleration and intensification of State power over society.
War is the great excuse for mobilizing all the energies and resources of
the nation, in the name of patriotic rhetoric, under the aegis and
dictation of the State apparatus. It is in war that the State really
comes into its own: swelling in power, in number, in pride, in absolute
dominion over the economy and the society. Society becomes a herd,
seeking to kill its alleged enemies, rooting out and suppressing all
dissent from the official war effort, happily betraying truth for the
supposed public interest. Society becomes an armed camp, with the values
and the morals—as the libertarian Albert Jay Nock once phrased it—of an
“army on the march.”

It is particularly ironic that war always enables the State to rally the
energies of its citizens under the slogan of helping it to defend the
country against some bestial outside menace. For the root myth that
enables the State to wax fat off war is the canard that war is a defense
*by* the State *of* its subjects. The facts, however, are precisely the
reverse. For if war is the health of the State, it is also its greatest
danger. A State can only “die” by defeat in war or by revolution. In
war, therefore, the State frantically mobilizes its subjects to fight
for *it* against another State, under the pretext that *it* is fighting
to defend them.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn8)^

In the history of the United States, war has generally been the main
occasion for the often permanent intensification of the power of the
State over society. In the War of 1812 against Great Britain, as we have
indicated above, the modern inflationary fractional-reserve banking
system first came into being on a large scale, as did protective
tariffs, internal federal taxation, and a standing army and navy. And a
direct consequence of the wartime inflation was the reestablishment of a
central bank, the Second Bank of the United States. Virtually all of
these statist policies and institutions continued permanently after the
war was over. The Civil War and its virtual one-party system led to the
permanent establishment of a neomercantilist policy of Big Government
and the subsidizing of various big business interests through protective
tariffs, huge land grants and other subsidies to railroads, federal
excise taxation, and a federally controlled banking system. It also
brought the first imposition of federal conscription and an income tax,
setting dangerous precedents for the future. World War I brought the
decisive and fateful turn from a relatively free and laissez-faire
economy to the present system of corporate state monopoly at home and
permanent global intervention abroad. The collectivist economic
mobilization during the war, headed by War Industries Board Chairman
Bernard Baruch, fulfilled the emerging dream of big business leaders and
progressive intellectuals for a cartelized and monopolized economy
planned by the federal government in cozy collaboration with big
business leadership. And it was precisely this wartime collectivism that
nurtured and developed a nationwide labor movement that would eagerly
take its place as junior partner in the new corporate State economy.
This temporary collectivism, furthermore, served as a permanent beacon
and model for big business leaders and corporatist politicians as the
kind of permanent peacetime economy that they would like to impose on
the United States. As food czar, Secretary of Commerce, and later as
president, Herbert C. Hoover helped bring this continuing monopolized
statist economy into being, and the vision was fulfilled in a
recrudescence of wartime agencies and even wartime personnel by Franklin
D. Roosevelt’s New Deal.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn9)^ World War I
also brought a permanent Wilsonian global intervention abroad, the
fastening of the newly imposed Federal Reserve System and a permanent
income tax on society, high federal budgets, massive conscription, and
intimate connections between economic boom, war contracts, and loans to
Western nations.

World War II was the culmination and fulfillment of all these trends:
Franklin D. Roosevelt finally fastened upon American life the heady
promise of the Wilsonian domestic and foreign program: permanent
partnership of Big Government, big business, and big unions; a
continuing and ever-expanding military-industrial complex; conscription;
continuing and accelerating inflation; and an endless and costly role as
counterrevolutionary “policeman” for the entire world. The
Roosevelt-Truman-Eisenhower-Kennedy-Johnson-Nixon-Ford-Carter world (and
there is little substantive difference among any of these
administrations) is “corporate liberalism,” the corporate State
fulfilled.

It is particularly ironic that conservatives, at least in rhetoric
supporters of a free-market economy, should be so complacent and even
admiring of our vast military-industrial complex. There is no greater
single distortion of the free market in present-day America. The bulk of
our scientists and engineers has been diverted from basic research for
civilian ends, from increasing productivity and the standard of living
of consumers, into wasteful, inefficient, and nonproductive military and
space boondoggles. These boondoggles are every bit as wasteful but
infinitely more destructive than the vast pyramid building of the
Pharaoh. It is no accident that Lord Keynes’s economics have proved to
be the economics par excellence of the corporate liberal State. For
Keynesian economists place equal approval upon all forms of government
spending, whether on pyramids, missiles, or steel plants; by definition
all of these expenditures swell the gross national product, regardless
of how wasteful they may be. It is only recently that many liberals have
begun to awaken to the evils of the waste, inflation, and militarism
that Keynesian corporate liberalism has brought to America.

As the scope of government spending—military and civilian alike—has
widened, science and industry have been skewed more and more into
unproductive goals and highly inefficient processes. The goal of
satisfying consumers as efficiently as possible has been increasingly
replaced by the currying of favors by government contractors, often in
the form of highly wasteful “cost-plus” contracts. Politics, in field
after field, has replaced economics in guiding the activities of
industry. Furthermore, as entire industries and regions of the country
have come to depend upon government and military contracts, a huge
vested interest has been created in continuing the programs, heedless of
whether they retain even the most threadbare excuse of military
necessity. Our economic prosperity has been made to depend on continuing
the narcotic of unproductive and antiproductive government
spending.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn10)^

One of the most perceptive and prophetic critics of America’s entry into
World War II was the classical liberal writer John T. Flynn. In his *As
We Go Marching*, written in the midst of the war he had tried so hard to
forestall, Flynn charged that the New Deal, culminating in its wartime
embodiment, had finally established the corporate State that important
elements of big business had been seeking since the turn of the
twentieth century. “The general idea,” Flynn wrote, was

> to reorder the society by making it a planned and coerced economy
> instead of a free one, in which business would be brought together
> into great guilds or an immense corporative structure, combining the
> elements of self rule and government supervision with a national
> economic policing system to enforce these decrees. ... This, after
> all, is not so very far from what business had been talking
> about.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn11)^

The New Deal had first attempted to create such a new society in the
National Recovery Administration and the Agricultural Adjustment
Administration, mighty engines of “regimentation” hailed by labor and
business alike. Now the advent of World War II had reestablished this
collectivist program—”an economy supported by great streams of debt
under complete control, with nearly all the planning agencies
functioning with almost totalitarian power under a vast bureaucracy.”
After the war, Flynn prophesied, the New Deal would attempt to expand
this system permanently into international affairs. He wisely predicted
that the great emphasis of vast governmental spending after the war
would continue to be military, since this is the one form of government
spending to which conservatives would never object, and which workers
would also welcome for its creation of jobs. “Thus militarism is the one
great glamorous public-works project upon which a variety of elements in
the community can be brought into
agreement.”^[12](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn12)^

Flynn predicted that America’s postwar policy would be
“internationalist” in the sense of being imperialist. Imperialism “is,
of course, international... in the sense that war is international,” and
it will follow from the policy of militarism. “We will do what other
countries have done; we will keep alive the fears of our people of the
aggressive ambitions of other countries and we will ourselves embark
upon imperialistic enterprises of our own.” Imperialism will ensure for
the United States the existence of perpetual “enemies,” of waging what
Charles A. Beard was later to call “perpetual war for perpetual peace.”
For, Flynn pointed out,

> we have managed to acquire bases all over the world. ... There is no
> part of the world where trouble can break out where... we cannot claim
> that our interests are menaced. Thus menaced, there must remain when
> the war is over a continuing argument in the hands of the imperialists
> for a vast naval establishment and a huge army ready to attack
> anywhere or to resist an attack from all the enemies we shall be
> obliged to have.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn13)^

One of the most moving portrayals of the change in American life wrought
by World War II was written by John Dos Passos, a lifelong radical and
individualist who was pushed from “extreme left” to “extreme right” by
the march of the New Deal. Dos Passos expressed his bitterness in his
postwar novel, *The Grand Design*:

> At home we organized bloodbanks and civilian defense and imitated the
> rest of the world by setting up concentration camps (only we called
> them relocation centers) and stuffing into them
>
> American citizens of Japanese ancestry... without benefit of *habeas
> corpus*. ...
>
> The President of the United States talked the sincere democrat and so
> did the members of Congress. In the Administration there were devout
> believers in civil liberty. “Now we’re busy fighting a war; we’ll
> deploy all four freedoms later on,” they said. ...
>
> War is a time of Caesars. ...
>
> And the American people were supposed to say thank you for the century
> of the Common Man turned over for relocation behind barbed wire so
> help him God.
>
> We learned. There are things we learned to do
>
> but we have not learned, in spite of the Constitution and the
> Declaration of Independence and the great debates at Richmond and
> Philadelphia
>
> how to put power over the lives of men into the hands of one man
>
> and to make him use it wisely.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn14)^

## SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY [soviet-foreign-policy]

In a previous chapter, we have already dealt with the problem of
national defense, abstracting from the question of whether the Russians
are *really* hell-bent upon a military attack upon the United States.
Since World War II, American military and foreign policy, at least
rhetorically, has been based upon the assumption of a looming threat of
Russian attack—an assumption that has managed to gain public approval
for global American intervention and for scores of billions in military
expenditures. But how realistic, how well grounded, *is* this
assumption?

First, there is no doubt that the Soviets, along with all other
Marxist-Leninists, would *like* to replace all existing social systems
by Communist regimes. But such a sentiment, of course, scarcely implies
any sort of realistic threat of attack—just as an ill wish in private
life can hardly be grounds for realistic expectation of imminent
aggression. On the contrary, Marxism-Leninism itself believes that a
victory of communism is inevitable—*not* on the wings of outside force,
but rather from accumulating tensions and “contradictions” within each
society. So Marxism-Leninism considers internal revolution (or, in the
current “Eurocommunist” version, democratic change) for installing
communism to be inevitable. At the same time, it holds any coercive
external imposition of communism to be at best suspect, and at worst
disruptive and counterproductive of genuine organic social change. Any
idea of “exporting” communism to other countries on the backs of the
Soviet military is totally contradictory to Marxist-Leninist theory.

We are not saying, of course, that Soviet leaders will never do anything
contrary to Marxist-Leninist theory. But to the extent that they act as
ordinary rulers of a strong Russian nation-state, the case for an
imminent Soviet threat to the United States is gravely weakened. For the
sole alleged basis of such a threat, as conjured up by our cold
warriors, is the Soviet Union’s alleged devotion to Marxist-Leninist
theory and to its ultimate goal of world Communist triumph. If the
Soviet rulers were simply to act as Russian dictators consulting only
their own nation-state interests, then the entire basis for treating the
Soviets as a uniquely diabolic source of imminent military assault
crumbles to the ground.

When the Bolsheviks took power in Russia in 1917, they had given little
thought to a future Soviet foreign policy, for they were convinced that
Communist revolution would soon follow in the advanced industrial
countries of Western Europe. When such hopes were dashed after the end
of World War I, Lenin and his fellow Bolsheviks adopted the theory of
“peaceful coexistence” as the basic foreign policy for a Communist
State. The idea was this: as the first successful Communist movement,
Soviet Russia would serve as a beacon for and supporter of other
Communist parties throughout the world. *But* the Soviet State *qua*
State would devote itself to peaceful relations with all other
countries, and would not attempt to export communism through inter-State
warfare. The idea here was not just to follow Marxist-Leninist theory,
but was the highly practical course of holding the survival of the
existing Communist State as the foremost goal of foreign policy: that
is, never to endanger the Soviet State by courting inter-State warfare.
Other countries would be expected to become Communist by their own
internal processes.

Thus, fortuitously, from a mixture of theoretical and practical grounds
of their own, the Soviets arrived early at what libertarians consider to
be the only proper and principled foreign policy. As time went on,
furthermore, this policy was reinforced by a “conservatism” that comes
upon all movements after they have acquired and retained power for any
length of time, in which the interests of keeping power over one’s
nation-state begins to take more and more precedence over the initial
ideal of world revolution. This increasing conservatism under Stalin and
his successors strengthened and reinforced the nonaggressive, “peaceful
coexistence” policy.

The Bolsheviks, indeed, began their success story by being literally the
only political party in Russia to clamor, from the beginning of World
War I, for an immediate Russian pullout from the war. Indeed, they went
further and courted enormous unpopularity among the public by calling
for the defeat of “their own” government (“revolutionary defeatism”).
When Russia began to suffer enormous losses, accompanied by massive
military desertions from the front, and the war became extremely
unpopular, the Bolsheviks, guided by Lenin, continued to be the only
party to call for an immediate end to the war—the other parties still
vowing to fight the Germans to the end. When the Bolsheviks took power,
Lenin, over the hysterical opposition of even the majority of the
Bolshevik central committee itself, insisted on concluding the
“appeasement” peace of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918. Here, Lenin
succeeded in taking Russia out of the war, even at the price of granting
to the victorious German army all the parts of the Russian empire which
it then occupied (including White Russia and the Ukraine). Thus, Lenin
and the Bolsheviks began their reign by being not simply a peace party,
but virtually a “peace-at-any-price” party.

After World War I and Germany’s defeat, the new Polish State attacked
Russia and succeeded in grabbing for itself a large chunk of White
Russia and the Ukraine. Taking advantage of the turmoil and of the civil
war within Russia at the end of the war, various other national
groups—Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—decided to break away
from the pre-World War I Russian empire and declare national
independence. Now, while Leninism pays lip service to national
self-determination, to Soviet rulers, from the very beginning, it was
clear that the boundaries of the old Russian State were supposed to
remain intact. The Red Army reconquered the Ukraine, not only from the
Whites, but also from the Ukrainian nationalists, and from the
indigenously Ukrainian anarchist army of Nestor Makhno as well. For the
rest, it was clear that Russia, like Germany in the 1920s and 1930s, was
a “revisionist” country vis à vis the postwar settlement at Versailles.
That is, the lodestar of both Russian and German foreign policy was to
recapture their pre-World War I borders—what they both considered the
“true” borders of their respective States. It should be noted that
*every* political party or tendency in Russia and Germany, whether
ruling the State or in opposition, agreed with this aim of full
restoration of national territory.

But, it should be emphasized, while Germany under Hitler took strong
measures to recapture the lost lands, the cautious and conservative
Soviet rulers did absolutely nothing. Only after the Stalin-Hitler pact
and the German conquest of Poland did the Soviets, now facing no danger
in doing so, recapture their lost territories. Specifically, the
Russians repossessed Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania as well as the old
Russian lands of White Russia and the Ukraine that had been eastern
Poland. And they were able to do so without a fight. The old pre-World
War I Russia had now been restored with the exception of Finland. But
Finland was prepared to fight. Here the Russians demanded not the
reincorporation of Finland as a whole, but only of parts of the Karelian
Isthmus which were ethnically Russian. When the Finns refused this
demand, the “Winter War” (1939–1940) between Russia and Finland ensued,
which ended with the Finns conceding only Russian
Karelia.^[15](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn15)^

On June 22, 1941, Germany, triumphant over everyone but England in the
West, launched a sudden, massive, and unprovoked assault on Soviet
Russia, an act of aggression aided and abetted by the other pro-German
States in Eastern Europe: Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, and
Finland. This German and allied invasion of Russia soon became one of
the pivotal facts in the history of Europe since that date. So
unprepared was Stalin for the assault, so trusting was he in the
rationality of the German-Russian accord for peace in Eastern Europe,
that he had allowed the Russian army to fall into disrepair. So
unwarlike was Stalin, in fact, that Germany was almost able to conquer
Russia in the face of enormous odds. Since Germany otherwise would have
been able to retain control of Europe indefinitely, it was Hitler who
was led by the siren call of anti-Communist ideology to throw away a
rational and prudent course and launch what was to be the beginning of
his ultimate defeat.

The mythology of the cold warriors often concedes that the Soviets were
not internationally aggressive *until* World War II—indeed, they are
compelled to assert this point, since most cold warriors heartily
approve the World War II alliance of the United States with Russia
against Germany. It was during and immediately after the war, they
assert, that Russia became expansionist and drove its way into Eastern
Europe.

What this charge overlooks is the central fact of the German and
associated assault upon Russia in June 1941. There is no doubt that
Germany and her allies launched this war. Hence, in order to defeat the
invaders, it was obviously necessary for the Russians to roll back the
invading armies and conquer Germany and the other warring countries of
Eastern Europe. It is easier to make a case for the United States being
expansionist for conquering and occupying Italy and part of Germany than
it is for Russia’s actions—after all, the United States was never
directly attacked by the Germans.

During World War II, the United States, Britain, and Russia, the three
major Allies, had agreed on joint three-power military occupation of all
the conquered territories. The United States was the first to break the
agreement during the war by allowing Russia no role whatever in the
military occupation of Italy. Despite this serious breach of agreement,
Stalin displayed his consistent preference for the conservative
interests of the Russian nation-state over cleaving to revolutionary
ideology by repeatedly betraying indigenous Communist movements. In
order to preserve peaceful relations between Russia and the West, Stalin
consistently tried to hold back the success of various Communist
movements. He was successful in France and Italy, where Communist
partisan groups might easily have seized power in the wake of the German
military retreat; but Stalin ordered them not to do so, and instead
persuaded them to join coalition regimes headed by anti-Communist
parties. In both countries, the Communists were soon ousted from the
coalition. In Greece, where the Communist partisans almost *did* seize
power, Stalin irretrievably weakened them by abandoning them and urging
them to turn over power to newly invading British troops.

In other countries, particularly ones where Communist partisan groups
were strong, the Communists flatly refused Stalin’s requests. In
Yugoslavia, the victorious Tito refused Stalin’s demand that Tito
subordinate himself to the anti-Communist Mihailovich in a governing
coalition; Mao refused a similar Stalin demand that he subordinate
himself to Chiang Kai-shek. There is no doubt that these rejections were
the beginning of the later extraordinarily important schisms within the
world Communist movement.

Russia, therefore, governed Eastern Europe as military occupier after
winning a war launched against her. Russia’s initial goal was not to
communize Eastern Europe on the backs of the Soviet army. Her goal was
to gain assurances that Eastern Europe would not be the broad highway
for an assault on Russia, as it had been three times in half a
century—the last time in a war in which over 20 million Russians had
been slaughtered. In short, Russia wanted countries on her border which
would not be anti-Communist in a military sense, and which would not be
used as a springboard for another invasion. Political conditions in
Eastern Europe were such that only in more modernized Finland did
non-Communist politicians exist whom Russia could trust to pursue a
peaceful line in foreign affairs. And in Finland, this situation was the
work of one far-seeing statesman, the agrarian leader Julio Paasikivi.
It was because Finland, then and since, has firmly followed the
“Paasikivi line” that Russia was willing to pull its troops out of
Finland and not to insist on the communization of that country—even
though it had fought two wars with Finland in the previous six years.

Even in the other Eastern European countries, Russia clung to coalition
governments for several years after the war and only fully communized
them in 1948—after three years of unrelenting American Cold War pressure
to try to oust Russia from these countries. In other areas, Russia
readily pulled its troops out of Austria and out of Azerbaijan.

The cold warriors find it difficult to explain Russian actions in
Finland. If Russia is always hell-bent to impose Communist rule wherever
it can, why the “soft line” on Finland? The only plausible explanation
is that its motivation is security for the Russian nation-state against
attack, with the success of world communism playing a very minor role in
its scale of priorities.

In fact, the cold warriors have never been able either to explain or
absorb the fact of deep schisms in the world Communist movement. For if
all Communists are governed by a common ideology, then every Communist
everywhere should be part of one unified monolith, and one which, given
the early success of the Bolsheviks, would make them subordinates or
“agents” of Moscow. If Communists are mainly motivated by their bond of
Marxism-Leninism, how come the deep China-Russia split, in which Russia,
for example, keeps one million troops at the ready on the China-Russia
frontier? How come the enmity between the Yugoslav and Albanian
Communist States? How come the actual military conflict between the
Cambodian and Vietnamese Communists? The answer, of course, is that once
a revolutionary movement seizes State power, it begins very quickly to
take on the attributes of a ruling class with a class interest in
retaining State power. The world revolution begins to pale, in their
outlook, to insignificance. And since State elites can and do have
conflicting interests in power and wealth, it is not surprising that
inter-Communist conflicts have become endemic.

Since their victory over German and associated military aggression in
World War II, the Soviets have continued to be conservative in their
military policy. Their only use of troops has been to *defend* their
territory in the Communist bloc, rather than to extend it further. Thus,
when Hungary threatened to leave the Soviet bloc in 1956, or
Czechoslovakia in 1968, the Soviets intervened with
troops—reprehensibly, to be sure, but still acting in a conservative and
defensive rather than expansionist manner. (The Soviets apparently gave
considerable thought to invading Yugoslavia when Tito took it out of the
Soviet bloc, but were deterred by the formidable qualities for guerrilla
fighting of the Yugoslav army.) In no case has Russia used troops to
extend its bloc or to conquer more territories.

Professor Stephen F. Cohen, director of the program in Russian Studies
at Princeton, has recently delineated the nature of Soviet conservatism
in foreign affairs:

> That a system born in revolution and still professing revolutionary
> ideas should have become one of the most conservative in the world may
> seem preposterous. But all those factors variously said to be most
> important in Soviet politics have contributed to this conservatism:
> the bureaucratic tradition of Russian government before the
> revolution; the subsequent bureaucratization of Soviet life, which
> proliferated conservative norms and created an entrenched class of
> zealous defenders of bureaucratic privilege; the geriatric nature of
> the present-day elite; and even the official ideology, whose thrust
> turned many years ago from the creation of a new social order to
> extolling the existing one. ...
>
> In other words, the main thrust of Soviet conservatism today is to
> preserve what it already has at home and abroad, not to jeopardize it.
> A conservative government is, of course, capable of dangerous
> militaristic actions, as we saw in Czechoslovakia... but these are
> acts of imperial protectionism, a kind of defensive militarism, not a
> revolutionary or aggrandizing one. It is certainly true that for most
> Soviet leaders, as presumably for most American leaders, detente is
> not an altruistic endeavor but the pursuit of national interests. In
> one sense, this is sad. But it is probably also true that mutual
> self-interest provides a more durable basis for detente than lofty,
> and finally empty, altruism.^[16](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn16)^

Similarly, as impeccable an anti-Soviet source as former CIA Director
William Colby finds the overwhelming concern of the Soviets to be the
defensive goal of avoiding another catastrophic invasion of their
territory. As Colby testified before the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee:

> You will find a concern, even a paranoia, over their \[the Soviets’\]
> own security. You will find the determination that they shall never
> again be invaded and put through the kinds of turmoil that they have
> been under and many different invasions. ... I think that they... want
> to overprotect themselves to make certain that that does not
> happen.^[17](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn17)^

Even the Chinese, for all their bluster, have pursued a conservative and
pacific foreign policy. Not only have they failed to invade Taiwan,
recognized internationally as part of China, but they have even allowed
the small offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu to remain in Chiang
Kai-shek’s hands. No moves have been made against the British and
Portuguese-occupied enclaves of Hong Kong and Macao. And China even took
the unusual step of declaring a *unilateral* cease-fire and withdrawal
of forces to its border after having triumphed easily over Indian arms
in their escalated border war.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn18)^

## AVOIDING *A PRIORI* HISTORY [avoiding-a-priori-history]

There is still one thesis common to Americans and even to some
libertarians that may prevent them from absorbing the analysis of this
chapter: the myth propounded by Woodrow Wilson that democracies must
inevitably be peace-loving while dictatorships are inevitably warlike.
This thesis was of course highly convenient for covering Wilson’s own
culpability for dragging America into a needless and monstrous war. But
apart from that, there is simply no evidence for this assumption. Many
dictatorships have turned inward, cautiously confining themselves to
preying on their own people: examples range from premodern Japan to
Communist Albania to innumerable dictatorships in the Third World today.
Uganda’s Idi Amin, perhaps the most brutal and repressive dictator in
today’s world, shows no signs whatever of jeopardizing his regime by
invading neighboring countries. On the other hand, such an indubitable
democracy as Great Britain spread its coercive imperialism across the
globe during the nineteenth and earlier centuries.

The theoretical reason why focussing on democracy or dictatorship misses
the point is that *States*—*all* States—rule their population and decide
whether or not to make war. And *all* States, whether formally a
democracy or dictatorship or some other brand of rule, are run by a
ruling elite. Whether or not these elites, in any particular case, will
make war upon another State is a function of a complex interweaving web
of causes, including temperament of the rulers, the strength of their
enemies, the inducements for war, public opinion. While public opinion
has to be gauged in either case, the only real difference between a
democracy and a dictatorship on making war is that in the former *more*
propaganda must be beamed at one’s subjects to engineer their approval.
Intensive propaganda is necessary in any case—as we can see by the
zealous opinion-moulding behavior of all modern warring States. But the
democratic State must work harder and faster. And also the democratic
State must be more hypocritical in using rhetoric designed to appeal to
the values of the masses: justice, freedom, national interest,
patriotism, world peace, etc. So in democratic States, the art of
propagandizing their subjects must be a bit more sophisticated and
refined. But this, as we have seen, is true of *all* governmental
decisions, not just war or peace. For all governments—but especially
democratic governments—must work hard at persuading their subjects that
all of their deeds of oppression are *really* in their subjects’ best
interests.

What we have said about democracy and dictatorship applies equally to
the lack of correlation between degrees of internal freedom in a country
and its external aggressiveness. Some States have proved themselves
perfectly capable of allowing a considerable degree of freedom
internally while making aggressive war abroad; other States have shown
themselves capable of totalitarian rule internally while pursuing a
pacific foreign policy. The examples of Uganda, Albania, China, Great
Britain, etc., apply equally well in this comparison.

In short, libertarians and other Americans must guard against *a priori*
history: in this case, against the assumption that, in any conflict, the
State which is more democratic or allows more internal freedom is
necessarily or even presumptively the victim of aggression by the more
dictatorial or totalitarian State. There is simply no historical
evidence whatever for such a presumption. In deciding on relative rights
and wrongs, on relative degrees of aggression in any dispute in foreign
affairs, there is no substitute for a detailed empirical, historical
investigation of the dispute itself. It should occasion no great
surprise, then, if such an investigation concludes that a democratic and
relatively far freer United States has been more aggressive and
imperialistic in foreign affairs than a relatively totalitarian Russia
or China. Conversely, hailing a State for being less aggressive in
foreign affairs in no way implies that the observer is an any way
sympathetic to that State’s internal record. It is vital—indeed, it is
literally a life-and-death matter—that Americans be able to look as
coolly and clear-sightedly, as free from myth at their government’s
record in foreign affairs as they are increasingly able to do in
domestic politics. For war and a phony “external threat” have long been
the chief means by which the State wins back the loyalty of its
subjects. As we have seen, war and militarism were the gravediggers of
classical liberalism; we must not allow the State to get away with this
ruse ever again.^[19](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn19)^

## A FOREIGN POLICY PROGRAM [a-foreign-policy-program]

To conclude our discussion, the primary plank of a libertarian foreign
policy program for America must be to call upon the United States to
abandon its policy of global interventionism: to withdraw immediately
and completely, militarily and politically, from Asia, Europe, Latin
America, the Middle East, from *everywhere*. The cry among American
libertarians should be for the United States to withdraw now, in every
way that involves the U.S. government. The United States should
dismantle its bases, withdraw its troops, stop its incessant political
meddling, and abolish the CIA. It should also end all foreign aid—which
is simply a device to coerce the American taxpayer into subsidizing
American exports and favored foreign States, all in the name of “helping
the starving peoples of the world.” In short, the United States
government should withdraw totally to within its own boundaries and
maintain a policy of strict political “isolation” or neutrality
everywhere.

The spirit of this ultra-”isolationist,” libertarian foreign policy was
expressed during the 1930s by retired Marine Corps Major General Smedley
D. Butler. In the fall of 1936, General Butler proposed a now-forgotten
constitutional amendment, an amendment which would delight libertarian
hearts if it were once again to be taken seriously. Here is Butler’s
proposed constitutional amendment in its entirety:

> 1. The removal of members of the land armed forces from within the
> continental limits of the United States and the Panama Canal Zone for
> any cause whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
>
> 2. The vessels of the United States Navy, or of the other branches of
> the armed service, are hereby prohibited from steaming, for any reason
> whatsoever except on an errand of mercy, more than five hundred miles
> from our coast.
>
> 3. Aircraft of the Army, Navy and Marine Corps is hereby prohibited
> from flying, for any reason whatsoever, more than seven hundred and
> fifty miles beyond the coast of the United
> States.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn20)^

## DISARMAMENT [disarmament]

Strict isolationism and neutrality, then, is the first plank of a
libertarian foreign policy, in addition to recognizing the chief
responsibility of the American State for the Cold War and for its entry
into all the other conflicts of this century. Given isolation, however,
what sort of arms policy should the United States pursue? Many of the
original isolationists also advocated a policy of “arming to the teeth”;
but such a program, in a nuclear age, continues the grave risk of global
holocaust, a mightily armed State, and the enormous waste and
distortions that unproductive government spending imposes on the
economy.

Even from a purely military point of view, the United States and the
Soviet Union have the power to annihilate each other many times over;
and the United States could easily preserve all of its nuclear
retaliatory power by scrapping every armament except Polaris submarines
which are invulnerable and armed with nuclear missiles with
multi-targeted warheads. Bur for the libertarian, or indeed for anyone
worried about massive nuclear destruction of human life, even disarming
down to Polaris submarines is hardly a satisfactory settlement. World
peace would continue to rest on a shaky “balance of terror,” a balance
that could always be upset by accident or by the actions of madmen in
power. No; for anyone to become secure from the nuclear menace it is
vital to achieve worldwide nuclear disarmament, a disarmament toward
which the SALT agreement of 1972 and the SALT II negotiations are only a
very hesitant beginning.

Since it is in the interest of all people, and even of all State rulers,
*not* to be annihilated in a nuclear holocaust, this mutual
self-interest provides a firm, rational basis for agreeing upon and
carrying out a policy of joint and worldwide “general and complete
disarmament” of nuclear and other modern weapons of mass destruction.
Such joint disarmament has been feasible ever since the Soviet Union
accepted Western proposals to this effect on May 10, 1955—an acceptance
which only gained a total and panicky Western abandonment of their own
proposals!^[21](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn21)^

The American version has long held that while we have wanted disarmament
plus inspection, the Soviets persist in wanting only disarmament without
inspection. The actual picture is very different: since May 1955, the
Soviet Union has favored any and all disarmament and unlimited
inspection of whatever has been disarmed; whereas the Americans have
advocated unlimited inspection but accompanied by little or no
disarmament! This was the burden of President Eisenhower’s spectacular
but basically dishonest “open skies” proposal, which replaced the
disarmament proposals we quickly withdrew after the Soviet acceptance of
May 1955. Even now that open skies have been essentially achieved
through American and Russian space satellites, the 1972 controversial
SALT agreement involves no actual disarmament, only limitations on
further nuclear expansion. Furthermore, since American strategic might
throughout the world rests on nuclear and air power, there is good
reason to believe in Soviet sincerity in any agreement to liquidate
nuclear missiles or offensive bombers.

Not only should there be joint disarmament of nuclear weapons, but also
of all weapons capable of being fired massively across national borders;
in particular bombers. It is precisely such weapons of mass destruction
as the missile and the bomber which can never be pinpoint-targeted to
avoid their use against innocent civilians. In addition, the total
abandonment of missiles and bombers would *enforce* upon every
government, especially including the American, a policy of isolation and
neutrality. Only if governments are deprived of weapons of offensive
warfare will they be forced to pursue a policy of isolation and peace.
Surely, in view of the black record of all governments, including the
American, it would be folly to leave these harbingers of mass murder and
destruction in their hands, and to trust them never to employ those
monstrous weapons. If it is illegitimate for government ever to employ
such weapons, why should they be allowed to remain, fully loaded, in
their none-too-clean hands?

The contrast between the conservative and the libertarian positions on
war and American foreign policy was starkly expressed in an interchange
between William F. Buckley, Jr., and the libertarian Ronald Hamowy in
the early days of the contemporary libertarian movement. Scorning the
libertarian critique of conservative foreign policy postures, Buckley
wrote:

> There is room in any society for those whose only concern is for
> tablet-keeping; but let them realize that it is only because of the
> conservatives’ disposition to sacrifice in order to withstand the
> \[Soviet\] enemy, that they are able to enjoy their monasticism, and
> pursue their busy little seminars on whether or not to demunicipalize
> the garbage collectors.

To which Hamowy trenchantly replied:

> It might appear ungrateful of me, but I must decline to thank Mr.
> Buckley for saving my life. It is, further, my belief that if his
> viewpoint prevails and that if he persists in his unsolicited aid the
> result will almost certainly be my death (and that of tens of millions
> of others) in nuclear war or my imminent imprisonment as an
> “un-American”....
>
> I hold strongly to my personal liberty and it is precisely because of
> this that I insist that no one has the right to force his decisions on
> another. Mr. Buckley chooses to be dead rather than Red. So do I. But
> I insist that all men be allowed to make that decision for themselves.
> A nuclear holocaust will make it for
> them.^[22](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn22)^

To which we might add that anyone who wishes is entitled to make the
personal decision of “better dead than Red” or “give me liberty or give
me death.” What he is *not* entitled to do is to make these decisions
*for* others, as the prowar policy of conservatism would do. What
conservatives are really saying is: “Better *them* dead than Red,” and
“give me liberty or give *them* death”—which are the battle cries not of
noble heroes but of mass murderers.

In one sense alone is Mr. Buckley correct: in the nuclear age it *is*
more important to worry about war and foreign policy than about
demunicipalizing garbage disposal, as important as the latter may be.
But if we do so, we come ineluctably to the reverse of the Buckleyite
conclusion. We come to the view that since modern air and missile
weapons *cannot* be pinpoint-targeted to avoid harming civilians, their
very existence must be condemned. And nuclear and air disarmament
becomes a great and overriding good to be pursued for its own sake, more
avidly even than the demunicipalization of garbage.

# PART III EPILOGUE [22-part03.html#page371]

# 15 A STRATEGY FOR LIBERTY [23-chap15.html#page373]

## EDUCATION: THEORY AND MOVEMENT [education-theory-and-movement]

And so we have it: a body of truth, sound in theory and capable of
application to our political problems—the new libertarianism. But now
that we have the truth, how can we achieve victory? We face the great
strategic problem of all “radical” creeds throughout history: How can we
get from here to there, from our current State-ridden and imperfect
world to the great goal of liberty?

There is no magic formula for strategy; any strategy for social change,
resting as it does on persuasion and conversion, can only be an art
rather than an exact science. But having said this, we are still not
bereft of wisdom in the pursuit of our goals. There *can* be a fruitful
theory, or at the very least, theoretical discussion, of the proper
strategy for change.

On one point there can scarcely be disagreement: a prime and necessary
condition for libertarian victory (or, indeed, for victory for *any*
social movement, from Buddhism to vegetarianism) is *education*: the
persuasion and conversion of large numbers of people to the cause.
Education, in turn, has two vital aspects: *calling people’s attention*
to the existence of such a system, and converting people to the
libertarian system. If our movement consisted only of slogans,
publicity, and other attention-getting devices, then we might be *heard*
by many people, but it would soon be discovered that we had nothing to
say—and so the hearing would be fitful and ephemeral. Libertarians must,
therefore, engage in hard thinking and scholarship, put forth
theoretical and systematic books, articles, and journals, and engage in
conferences and seminars. On the other hand, a mere elaboration of the
theory will get nowhere if no one has ever heard of the books and
articles; hence the need for publicity, slogans, student activism,
lectures, radio and TV spots, etc. True education cannot proceed without
theory *and* activism, without an ideology and *people* to carry that
ideology forward.

Thus, just as the theory needs to be carried to the attention of the
public, so does the theory need people to hold the banner, discuss,
agitate, and carry the message forward and outward to the public. Once
again, both theory and movement become futile and sterile without each
other; the theory will die on the vine without a self-conscious movement
which dedicates itself to advancing the theory and the goal. The
movement will become mere pointless motion if it loses sight of the
ideology and the goal in view. Some libertarian theorists feel that
there is something impure or disreputable about a living movement with
acting individuals; but how can liberty be achieved without libertarians
to advance the cause? On the other hand, some militant activists, in
their haste for action—*any* action—scorn what seem to be parlor
discussions of theory; yet their action becomes futile and wasted energy
if they have only a dim idea of what they are being active *about*.

Furthermore, one often hears libertarians (as well as members of other
social movements) bewail that they are “only talking to themselves” with
their books and journals and conferences; that few people of the
“outside world” are listening. But this frequent charge gravely
misconceives the many-sided purpose of “education” in the broadest
sense. It is not only necessary to educate *others*; continual
self-education is also (and equally) necessary. The corps of
libertarians must always try to recruit others to their ranks, to be
sure; but they must *also* keep their own ranks vibrant and healthy.
Education of “ourselves” accomplishes two vital goals. One is the
refining and advancing of the libertarian “theory”—the goal and purpose
of our whole enterprise. Libertarianism, while vital and true, cannot be
merely graven in stone tablets; it must be a living theory, advancing
through writing and discussion, and through refuting and combatting
errors as they arise. The libertarian movement has dozens of small
newsletters and magazines ranging from mimeographed sheets to slick
publications, constantly emerging and dying. This is a sign of a
healthy, growing movement, a movement that consists of countless
individuals thinking, arguing, and contributing.

But there is another critical reason for “talking to ourselves,” *even
if* that were all the talking that was going on. And that is
*reinforcement*—the psychologically necessary knowledge that there are
other people of like mind to talk to, argue with, and generally
communicate and interact with. At present, the libertarian creed is
still that of a relatively small minority, and furthermore, it proposes
radical changes in the *status quo*. Hence, it is bound to be a lonely
creed, and the reinforcement of having a movement, of “talking to
ourselves,” can combat and overcome that isolation. The contemporary
movement is now old enough to have had a host of defectors; analysis of
these defections shows that, in almost every case, the libertarian has
been isolated, cut off from fellowship and interaction with his
colleagues. A flourishing movement with a sense of community and *esprit
de corps* is the best antidote for giving up liberty as a hopeless or
“impractical” cause.

## ARE WE “UTOPIANS”? [are-we-utopians]

All right, we are to have education through both theory and a movement.
But what then should be the *content* of that education? Every “radical”
creed has been subjected to the charge of being “utopian,” and the
libertarian movement is no exception. Some libertarians themselves
maintain that we should not frighten people off by being “too radical,”
and that therefore the full libertarian ideology and program should be
kept hidden from view. These people counsel a “Fabian” program of
gradualism, concentrating solely on a gradual whittling away of State
power. An example would be in the field of taxation: Instead of
advocating the “radical” measure of abolition of all taxation, or even
of abolishing income taxation, we should confine ourselves to a call for
tiny improvements; say, for a two percent cut in income tax.

In the field of strategic thinking, it behooves libertarians to heed the
lessons of the Marxists, because they have been thinking about strategy
for radical social change longer than any other group. Thus, the
Marxists see two critically important strategic fallacies that “deviate”
from the proper path: one they call “left-wing sectarianism”; the other,
and opposing, deviation is “right-wing opportunism.” The critics of
libertarian “extremist” principles are the analog of the Marxian
“right-wing opportunists.” The major problem with the opportunists is
that by confining themselves strictly to gradual and “practical”
programs, programs that stand a good chance of immediate adoption, they
are in grave danger of completely losing sight of the ultimate
objective, the libertarian goal. He who confines himself to calling for
a two percent reduction in taxes helps to bury the ultimate goal of
abolition of taxation altogether. By concentrating on the immediate
means, he helps liquidate the ultimate goal, and therefore the point of
being a libertarian in the first place. If libertarians refuse to hold
aloft the banner of the pure principle, of the ultimate goal, *who
will?* The answer is no one, hence another major source of defection
from the ranks in recent years has been the erroneous path of
opportunism.

A prominent case of defection through opportunism is someone we shall
call “Robert,” who became a dedicated and militant libertarian back in
the early 1950s. Reaching quickly for activism and immediate gains,
Robert concluded that the proper strategic path was to play down all
talk of the libertarian goal, and in particular to play down libertarian
hostility to government. His aim was to stress only the “positive” and
the accomplishments that people could achieve through voluntary action.
As his career advanced, Robert began to find uncompromising libertarians
an encumbrance; so he began systematically to fire anyone in his
organization caught being “negative” about government. It did not take
very long for Robert to abandon the libertarian ideology openly and
explicitly, and to call for a “partnership” between government and
private enterprise—between coercion and the voluntary—in short, to take
his place openly in the Establishment. Yet, in his cups, Robert will
even refer to himself as an “anarchist,” but only in some abstract
cloud-land totally unrelated to the world as it is.

The free-market economist F.A. Hayek, himself in no sense an
“extremist,” has written eloquently of the vital importance for the
success of liberty of holding the pure and “extreme” ideology aloft as a
never-to-be-forgotten creed. Hayek has written that one of the great
attractions of socialism has always been the continuing stress on its
“ideal” goal, an ideal that permeates, informs, and guides the actions
of all those striving to attain it. Hayek then adds:

> We must make the building of a free society once more an intellectual
> adventure, a deed of courage. What we lack is a liberal Utopia, a
> programme which seems neither a mere defence of things as they are nor
> a diluted kind of socialism, but a truly liberal radicalism which does
> not spare the susceptibility of the mighty (including the trade
> unions), which is not too severely practical and which does not
> confine itself to what appears today as politically possible. We need
> intellectual leaders who are prepared to resist the blandishments of
> power and influence and who are willing to work for an ideal, however
> small may be the prospects of its early realization. They must be men
> who are willing to stick to principles and to fight for their full
> realization, however remote. ... Free trade and freedom of opportunity
> are ideals which still may rouse the imaginations of large numbers,
> but a mere “reasonable freedom of trade” or a mere “relaxation of
> controls” is neither intellectually respectable nor likely to inspire
> any enthusiasm. The main lesson which the true liberal must learn from
> the success of the socialists is that it was their courage to be
> Utopian which gained them the support of the intellectuals and thereby
> an influence on public opinion which is daily making possible what
> only recently seemed utterly remote. Those who have concerned
> themselves exclusively with what seemed practicable in the existing
> state of opinion have constantly found that even this has rapidly
> become politically impossible as the result of changes in a public
> opinion which they have done nothing to guide. Unless we can make the
> philosophic foundations of a free society once more a living
> intellectual issue, and its implementation a task which challenges the
> ingenuity and imagination of our liveliest minds, the prospects of
> freedom are indeed dark. But if we can regain that belief in the power
> of ideas which was the mark of liberalism at its best, the battle is
> not lost.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn1)^

Hayek is here highlighting an important truth, and an important reason
for stressing the ultimate goal: the excitement and enthusiasm that a
logically consistent system can inspire. Who, in contrast, will go to
the barricades for a two percent tax reduction?

There is another vital tactical reason for cleaving to pure principle.
It is true that day-to-day social and political events are the
resultants of many pressures, the often unsatisfactory outcome of the
push-and-pull of conflicting ideologies and interests. But if only for
that reason, it is all the more important for the libertarian to keep
upping the ante. The call for a two percent tax reduction may achieve
only the slight moderation of a projected tax *increase;* a call for a
drastic tax cut may indeed achieve a substantial reduction. And, over
the years, it is precisely the strategic role of the “extremist” to keep
pushing the matrix of day-to-day action further and further in his
direction. The socialists have been particularly adept at this strategy.
If we look at the socialist program advanced 60, or even 30 years ago,
it will be evident that measures considered dangerously socialistic a
generation or two ago are now considered an indispensable part of the
“mainstream” of the American heritage. In this way, the day-to-day
compromises of supposedly “practical” politics get pulled inexorably in
the collectivist direction. There is no reason why the libertarian
cannot accomplish the same result. In fact, one of the reasons that the
conservative opposition to collectivism has been so weak is that
conservatism, by its very nature, offers not a consistent political
philosophy but only a “practical” defense of the existing *status quo*,
enshrined as embodiments of the American “tradition.” Yet, as statism
grows and accretes, it becomes, by definition, increasingly entrenched
and therefore “traditional”; conservatism can then find no intellectual
weapons to accomplish its overthrow.

Cleaving to principle means something more than holding high and not
contradicting the ultimate libertarian ideal. It *also* means striving
to achieve that ultimate goal as rapidly as is physically possible. In
short, the libertarian must never advocate or *prefer* a gradual, as
opposed to an immediate and rapid, approach to his goal. For by doing
so, he undercuts the overriding importance of his own goals and
principles. And if he himself values his own goals so lightly, how
highly will *others* value them?

In short, to really pursue the goal of liberty, the libertarian must
desire it attained by the most effective and speediest means available.
It was in this spirit that the classical liberal Leonard E. Read,
advocating immediate and total abolition of price and wage controls
after World War II, declared in a speech, “If there were a button on
this rostrum, the pressing of which would release all wage and price
controls instantaneously, I would put my finger on it and
push!”^[2](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn2)^

The libertarian, then, should be a person who would push the button, if
it existed, for the instantaneous abolition of all invasions of liberty.
Of course, he knows, too, that such a magic button does not exist, but
his fundamental preference colors and shapes his entire strategic
perspective.

Such an “abolitionist” perspective does not mean, again, that the
libertarian has an unrealistic assessment of how rapidly his goal will,
in fact, be achieved. Thus, the libertarian abolitionist of slavery,
William Lloyd Garrison, was not being “unrealistic” when in the 1830s he
first raised the glorious standard of immediate emancipation of the
slaves. His goal was the morally proper one, and his strategic realism
came in the fact that he did not expect his goal to be quickly reached.
We have seen in chapter 1 that Garrison himself distinguished: “Urge
immediate abolition as earnestly as we may, it will, alas! be gradual
abolition in the end. We have never said that slavery would be
overthrown by a single blow; that it ought to be, we shall always
contend.”^[3](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn3)^ Otherwise, as Garrison
trenchantly warned, “Gradualism in theory is perpetuity in practice.”

Gradualism in theory indeed undercuts the goal itself by conceding that
it must take second or third place to other nonor antilibertarian
considerations. For a preference for gradualism implies that these other
considerations are more important than liberty. Thus, suppose that the
abolitionist of slavery had said, “I advocate an end to slavery—but only
after ten years’ time.” But this would imply that abolition eight or
nine years from now, or *a fortiori* immediately, would be *wrong,* and
that therefore it is *better* for slavery to be continued a while
longer. But this would mean that considerations of justice have been
abandoned, and that the goal itself is no longer held highest by the
abolitionist (or libertarian). In fact, for both the abolitionist and
libertarian this would mean they are advocating the *prolongation* of
crime and injustice.

While it is vital for the libertarian to hold his ultimate and “extreme”
ideal aloft, this does not, contrary to Hayek, make him a “utopian.” The
true utopian is one who advocates a system that is contrary to the
natural law of human beings and of the real world. A utopian system is
one that could not work even if everyone were persuaded to try to put it
into practice. The utopian system could not work, i.e., could not
sustain itself in operation. The utopian goal of the left: communism—the
abolition of specialization and the adoption of uniformity—could not
work even if everyone were willing to adopt it immediately. It could not
work because it violates the very nature of man and the world,
especially the uniqueness and individuality of every person, of his
abilities and interests, and because it would mean a drastic decline in
the production of wealth, so much so as to doom the great bulk of the
human race to rapid starvation and extinction.

In short, the term “utopian” in popular parlance confuses two kinds of
obstacles in the path of a program radically different from the status
quo. One is that it violates the nature of man and of the world and
therefore could not work once it was put into effect. This is the
utopianism of communism. The second is the difficulty in *convincing*
enough people that the program should be adopted. The former is a bad
theory because it violates the nature of man; the latter is simply a
problem of human *will*, of convincing enough people of the rightness of
the doctrine. “Utopian” in its common pejorative sense applies only to
the former. In the deepest sense, then, the libertarian doctrine is not
utopian but eminently realistic, because it is the only theory that is
really consistent with the nature of man and the world. The libertarian
does not deny the variety and diversity of man, he glories in it and
seeks to give that diversity full expression in a world of complete
freedom. And in doing so, he also brings about an enormous increase in
productivity and in the living standards of everyone, an eminently
“practical” result generally scorned by true utopians as evil
“materialism.”

The libertarian is also eminently realistic because he alone understands
fully the nature of the State and its thrust for power. In contrast, it
is the seemingly far more realistic conservative believer in “limited
government” who is the truly impractical utopian. This conservative
keeps repeating the litany that the central government should be
severely limited by a constitution. Yet, at the same time that he rails
against the corruption of the original Constitution and the widening of
federal power since 1789, the conservative fails to draw the proper
lesson from that degeneration. The idea of a strictly limited
constitutional State was a noble experiment that failed, even under the
most favorable and propitious circumstances. If it failed then, why
should a similar experiment fare any better now? No, it is the
conservative laissez-fairist, the man who puts all the guns and all the
decision-making power into the hands of the central government and
*then* says, “Limit yourself”; it is *he* who is truly the impractical
utopian.

There is another deep sense in which libertarians scorn the broader
utopianism of the left. The left utopians invariably postulate a drastic
change in the nature of man; to the left, man *has* no nature. The
individual is supposed to be infinitely malleable by his institutions,
and so the communist ideal (or the transitional socialist system) is
supposed to bring about the New Communist Man. The libertarian believes
that, in the ultimate analysis, every individual has free will and
moulds himself; it is therefore folly to put one’s hope in a uniform and
drastic change in people brought about by the projected New Order. The
libertarian would *like* to see a moral improvement in everyone,
although his moral goals scarcely coincide with those of the socialists.
He would, for example, be overjoyed to see all desire for aggression by
one man against another disappear from the face of the earth. But he is
far too much of a realist to put his trust in this sort of change.
Instead, the libertarian system is one that will at once be far more
moral and work much better than any other, *given* any existing human
values and attitudes. The more the desire for aggression disappears, of
course, the better *any* social system will work, including the
libertarian; the less need will there be, for example, for any resort to
police or to the courts. But the libertarian system places no reliance
on any such change.

If, then, the libertarian must advocate the immediate attainment of
liberty and abolition of statism, and if gradualism in theory is
contradictory to this overriding end, what *further* strategic stance
may a libertarian take in today’s world? Must he necessarily *confine*
himself to advocating immediate abolition? Are “transitional demands,”
steps *toward* liberty in practice, necessarily illegitimate? No, for
this would fall into the other self-defeating strategic trap of
“left-wing sectarianism.” For while libertarians have too often been
opportunists who lose sight of or under-cut their ultimate goal, some
have erred in the opposite direction: fearing and condemning *any
advances* toward the idea as necessarily selling out the goal itself.
The tragedy is that these sectarians, in condemning all advances that
fall short of the goal, serve to render vain and futile the cherished
goal itself. For much as all of us would be overjoyed to arrive at total
liberty at a single bound, the realistic prospects for such a mighty
leap are limited. If social change is not always tiny and gradual,
neither does it usually occur in a single leap. In rejecting any
transitional approaches to the goal, then, these sectarian libertarians
make it impossible for the goal itself ever to be reached. Thus, the
sectarians can eventually be as fully “liquidationist” of the pure goal
as the opportunists themselves.

Sometimes, curiously enough, the same individual will undergo
alterations from one of these opposing errors to the other, in each case
scorning the proper strategic path. Thus, despairing after years of
futile reiteration of his purity while making no advances in the real
world, the left sectarian may leap into the heady thickets of right
opportunism, in the quest for *some* short-run advance, even at the cost
of his ultimate goal. Or the right opportunist, growing disgusted at his
own or his colleagues’ compromise of their intellectual integrity and
their ultimate goals, may leap into left sectarianism and decry *any*
setting of strategic priorities toward those goals. In this way, the two
opposing deviations feed on and reinforce each other, and are both
destructive of the major task of effectively reaching the libertarian
goal.

How, then, can we know whether any halfway measure or transitional
demand should be hailed as a step forward or condemned as an
opportunistic betrayal? There are two vitally important criteria for
answering this crucial question: (1) that, whatever the transitional
demands, the ultimate end of liberty be always held aloft as the desired
goal; and (2) that no steps or means ever explicitly or implicitly
*contradict* the ultimate goal. A short-run demand may not go as far as
we would like, but it should always be consistent with the final end; if
not, the short-run goal will work against the long-run purpose, and
opportunistic liquidation of libertarian principle will have arrived.

An example of such counterproductive and opportunistic strategy may be
taken from the tax system. The libertarian looks forward to eventual
abolition of taxes. It is perfectly legitimate for him, as a strategic
measure in that desired direction, to push for a drastic reduction or
repeal of the income tax. But the libertarian must never support any new
tax or tax increase. For example, he must not, while advocating a large
cut in income taxes, also call for its replacement by a sales or other
form of tax. The reduction or, better, the abolition of a tax is always
a noncontradictory reduction of State power and a significant step
toward liberty; but its replacement by a new or increased tax elsewhere
does just the opposite, for it signifies a new and additional imposition
of the State on some other front. The imposition of a new or higher tax
flatly contradicts and undercuts the libertarian goal itself.

Similarly, in this age of permanent federal deficits, we are often faced
with the practical problem: Should we agree to a tax cut, even though it
may well result in an increased government deficit? Conservatives, who
from their particular perspective prefer budget balancing to tax
reduction, invariably oppose any tax cut which is not immediately and
strictly accompanied by an equivalent or greater cut in government
expenditures. But since taxation is an illegitimate act of aggression,
any failure to welcome a tax cut—any tax cut—with alacrity undercuts and
contradicts the libertarian goal. The time to oppose government
expenditures is when the budget is being considered or voted upon; then
the libertarian should call for drastic slashes in expenditures as well.
In short, government activity must be reduced whenever it can: any
opposition to a particular cut in taxes or expenditures is
impermissible, for it contradicts libertarian principles and the
libertarian goal.

A particularly dangerous temptation for practicing opportunism is the
tendency of some libertarians, especially in the Libertarian party, to
appear “responsible” and “realistic” by coming up with some sort of
“four-year plan” for destatization. The important point here is not the
number of years in the plan, but the idea of setting forth any sort of
comprehensive and planned program of transition to the goal of total
liberty. For example: that in year 1, law A should be repealed, law B
modified, tax C cut by 10 percent, etc.; in year 2, law D should be
repealed, tax C cut by a further 10 percent, etc. The grave problem with
such a plan, the severe contradiction with libertarian principle, is
that it strongly implies, e.g., that law D should *not* be repealed
*until* the second year of the planned program. Hence the trap of
gradualism-in-theory would be fallen into on a massive scale. The
would-be libertarian planners would have fallen into a position of
seeming to oppose any faster pace toward liberty than is encompassed by
their plan. And, indeed, there is no legitimate reason for a slower than
a faster pace; quite the contrary.

There is another grave flaw in the very idea of a comprehensive planned
program toward liberty. For the very care and studied pace, the very
all-embracing nature of the program, implies that the State is not
really the common enemy of mankind, that it is possible and desirable to
*use* the State for engineering a planned and measured pace toward
liberty. The insight that the State is the major enemy of mankind, on
the other hand, leads to a very different strategic outlook: namely,
that libertarians should push for and accept with alacrity *any*
reduction of State power or activity on any front. Any such reduction at
any time should be a welcome decrease of crime and aggression.
Therefore, the libertarian’s concern should not be to use the State to
embark on a measured course of destatization, but rather to hack away at
any and all manifestations of statism whenever and wherever he or she
can.

In keeping with this analysis, the National Committee of the Libertarian
party in October 1977 adopted a declaration of strategy which included
the following:

> We must hold high the banner of pure principle, and never compromise
> our goal. ... The moral imperative of libertarian principle demands
> that tyranny, injustice, the absence of full liberty, and violation of
> rights continue no longer.
>
> Any intermediate demand must be treated, as it is in the Libertarian
> Party platform, as pending achievement of the pure goal and inferior
> to it. Therefore, any such demand should be presented as leading
> toward our ultimate goal, not as an end in itself.
>
> Holding high our principles means avoiding completely the quagmire of
> self-imposed, obligatory gradualism: We must avoid the view that, in
> the name of fairness, abating suffering, or fulfilling expectations,
> we must temporize and stall on the road to liberty. Achieving liberty
> must be our overriding goal.
>
> We must not commit ourselves to any particular order of destatization,
> for that would be construed as our endorsing the continuation of
> statism and the violation of rights. Since we must never be in the
> position of advocating the continuation of tyranny, we should accept
> any and all destatization measures wherever and whenever we can.

Thus, the libertarian must never allow himself to be trapped into any
sort of proposal for “positive” governmental action; in his perspective,
the role of government should only be to remove itself from all spheres
of society just as rapidly as it can be pressured to do so.

Neither should there be any contradictions in rhetoric. The libertarian
should not indulge in any rhetoric, let alone any policy
recommendations, which would work against the eventual goal. Thus,
suppose that a libertarian is asked to give his views on a specific tax
cut. Even if he does not feel that he can at the moment call loudly for
tax abolition, the one thing that he *must not* do is add to his support
of a tax cut such unprincipled rhetoric as, “Well, of course, *some*
taxation is essential,” etc. Only harm to the ultimate objective can be
achieved by rhetorical flourishes which confuse the public and
contradict and violate principle.

## IS EDUCATION ENOUGH? [is-education-enough]

All libertarians, of whatever faction or persuasion, lay great stress on
education, on convincing an ever-larger number of people to become
libertarians, and hopefully, highly dedicated ones. The problem,
however, is that the great bulk of libertarians hold a very simplistic
view of the role and scope of such education. They do not, in short,
even attempt to answer the question: After education, what? What then?
What happens after X number of people are convinced? And how many need
to be convinced to press on to the next stage? *Everyone?* A majority?
Many people?

The implicit view of many libertarians is that only education is needed
because everyone is an equally likely prospect for conversion.
*Everyone* can be converted. While logically, of course, this is true,
*socio*logically this is a feeble strategy indeed. Libertarians, of all
people, should recognize that the State is a parasitic enemy of society,
and that the State creates an elite of rulers who dominate the rest of
us and extract their income by coercion. *Convincing* the ruling groups
of their own iniquity, while logically possible (and perhaps even
feasible in one or two instances), is almost impossible in practice. How
much chance is there, for example, of convincing the executives of
General Dynamics or of Lockheed that they should not take government
largesse? How much likelihood is there that the President of the United
States will read this book, or any other piece of libertarian
literature, and then exclaim: “They’re right. I’ve been wrong. I
resign.”? Clearly the chances of converting those who are waxing fat by
means of State exploitation are negligible, to say the least. Our hope
is to convert the mass of the people who are being victimized by State
power, not those who are gaining by it.

But when we say this, we are also saying that beyond the problem of
education lies the problem of power. After a substantial number of
people have been converted, there will be the additional task of finding
ways and means to remove State power from our society. Since the State
will not gracefully convert itself out of power, other means than
education, means of pressure, will have to be used. What particular
means or what combination of means—whether by voting, alternative
institutions untouched by the State or massive failure to cooperate with
the State—depends on the conditions of the time and what will be found
to work or not to work. In contrast to matters of theory and principle,
the particular tactics to be used—so long as they are consistent with
the principles and ultimate goal of a purely free society—are a matter
of pragmatism, judgment, and the inexact “art” of the tactician.

## WHICH GROUPS? [23-chap15.html#page388]

But education is the current strategic problem for the foreseeable and
indefinite future. An important strategic question is *who*: If we
cannot hope to convert our rulers in substantial numbers, *who* are the
most likely prospects for conversion? which social, occupational,
economic, or ethnic classes?

Conservatives have often placed their central hopes in big businessmen.
This view of big business was most starkly expressed in Ayn Rand’s
*dictum* that “Big Business is America’s most persecuted minority.”
Persecuted? With a few honorable exceptions, big business jostles one
another eagerly to line up at the public trough. Does Lockheed, or
General Dynamics, or AT&T, or Nelson Rockefeller feel persecuted?

Big business support for the Corporate Welfare-Warfare State is so
blatant and so far-ranging, on all levels from the local to the federal,
that even many conservatives have had to acknowledge it, at least to
some extent. How then explain such fervent support from “America’s most
persecuted minority?” The only way out for conservatives is to assume
(a) that these businessmen are dumb, and don’t understand their own
economic interests, and/or (b) that they have been brainwashed by
left-liberal intellectuals, who have poisoned their souls with guilt and
misguided altruism. Neither of these explanations will wash, however, as
only a glance at AT&T or Lockheed will amply show. Big businessmen tend
to be admirers of statism, to be “corporate liberals,” not because their
souls have been poisoned by intellectuals, but because a good thing has
thereby been coming their way. Ever since the acceleration of statism at
the turn of the twentieth century, big businessmen have been using the
great powers of State contracts, subsidies and cartelization to carve
out privileges for themselves at the expense of the rest of the society.
It is not too farfetched to assume that Nelson Rockefeller is guided far
more by self-interest than he is by woolly-headed altruism. It is
generally admitted even by liberals, for example, that the vast network
of government regulatory agencies is being used to cartelize each
industry on behalf of the large firms and at the expense of the public.
But to salvage their New Deal world-view, liberals have to console
themselves with the thought that these agencies and similar “reforms,”
enacted during the Progressive, Wilson, or Rooseveltian periods, were
launched in good faith, with the “public weal” grandly in view. The idea
and genesis of the agencies and other liberal reforms were therefore
“good”; it was only in practice that the agencies somehow slipped into
sin and into subservience to private, corporate interests. But what
Kolko, Weinstein, Domhoff and other revisionist historians have shown,
clearly and thoroughly, is that this is a piece of liberal mythology. In
reality, all of these reforms, on the national and local levels alike,
were conceived, written, and lobbied for by these very privileged groups
themselves. The work of these historians reveals conclusively that there
*was* no Golden Age of Reform before sin crept in; sin was there from
the beginning, from the moment of conception. The liberal reforms of the
Progressive-New Deal-Welfare State were designed to create what they did
in fact create: a world of centralized statism, of “partnership” between
government and industry, a world which subsists in granting subsidies
and monopoly privileges to business and other favored groups.

Expecting the Rockefellers or the legion of other favored big
businessmen to convert to a libertarian or even a laissez-faire view is
a vain and empty hope. But this is not to say that *all* big
businessmen, or businessmen in general, must be written off. Contrary to
the Marxists, not all businessmen, or even big businessmen, constitute a
homogeneous economic class with identical class interests. On the
contrary, when the CAB confers monopoly privileges on a few large
airlines, or when the FCC confers a monopoly on AT&T, there are numerous
other firms and businessmen, small and large, who are injured and
*excluded* from the privileges. The conferring of a monopoly of
communications on AT&T by the FCC, for example, for a long while kept
the now rapidly growing data communications industry stagnating in
infancy; it was only an FCC decision to allow competition that enabled
the industry to grow by leaps and bounds. Privilege implies exclusion,
so there will always be a host of businesses and businessmen, large and
small, who will have a solid economic interest in ending State control
over their industry. There are therefore a host of businessmen,
especially those remote from the privileged “Eastern Establishment,” who
are potentially receptive to free-market and libertarian ideas.

*Which* groups, then, could we expect to be particularly receptive to
libertarian ideas? Where, as the Marxists would put it, is our proposed
“agency for social change”? This, of course, is an important strategic
question for libertarians, since it gives us leads on where to direct
our educational energies.

Campus youth is one group that has been prominent in the rising
libertarian movement. This is not surprising: college is the time when
people are most open to reflection and to considering basic questions of
our society. As youth enamored of consistency and unvarnished truth, as
collegians accustomed to a world of scholarship and abstract ideas, and
not yet burdened with the care and the often narrower vision of adult
employment, these youngsters provide a fertile field for libertarian
conversion. We can expect far greater growth of libertarianism on the
nation’s campuses in the future, a growth that is already being matched
by the adherence of an expanding number of young scholars, professors,
and graduate students.

Youth in general should also be attracted by the libertarian position on
subjects that are often closest to their concerns: specifically, our
call for complete abolition of the draft, withdrawal from the Cold War,
civil liberties for everyone, and legalization of drugs and other
victimless crimes.

The media, too, have proved to be a rich source of favorable interest in
the new libertarian creed. Not simply for its publicity value, but
because the consistency of libertarianism attracts a group of people who
are most alert to new social and political trends, and who, while
originally liberals, are most alert to the growing failures and
breakdowns of Establishment liberalism. Media people generally find that
they cannot be attracted to a hostile conservative movement which
automatically writes them off as leftists and which takes uncongenial
positions on foreign policy and civil liberties. But these same media
persons can be and are favorably disposed to a libertarian movement
which wholeheartedly agrees with their instincts on peace and personal
liberty, and then links up their opposition to Big Government in these
areas to government intervention in the economy and in property rights.
More and more media people are making these new and illuminating
connections, and they of course are extremely important in their
influence and leverage on the rest of the public.

What of “Middle America”—that vast middle class and working class that
constitute the bulk of the American population—and which is often at
polar opposites from campus youth? Do we have any appeal for them?
Logically, our appeal to Middle America should be even greater. We
direct ourselves squarely to the aggravated and chronic discontent that
afflicts the mass of the American people: rising taxes, inflation, urban
congestion, crime, welfare scandals. Only libertarians have concrete and
consistent solutions to these pressing ills: solutions that center on
getting them out from under government in all these areas and turning
them over to private and voluntary action. We can show that government
and statism have been responsible for these evils, and that getting
coercive government off our backs will provide the remedies.

To small businessmen we can promise a truly free-enterprise world, shorn
of monopoly privilege, cartels, and subsidies engineered by the State
and the Establishment. And to them and to the big businessmen outside
the monopoly Establishment we can promise a world where their individual
talents and energies can at last have full room to expand and to provide
improved technology and increased productivity for them and for us all.
To various ethnic and minority groups we can show that only under
liberty is there full freedom for each group to cultivate its concerns
and to run its own institutions, unimpeded and uncoerced by majority
rule.

In short, the potential appeal of libertarianism is a multiclass appeal;
it is an appeal that cuts across race, occupation, economic class, and
the generations; any and all people not directly in the ruling elite are
potentially receptive to our message. Every person or group that values
its liberty or prosperity is a potential adherent to the libertarian
creed.

Liberty, then, has the potential for appealing to all groups across the
public spectrum. Yet, it is a fact of life that when things are going
smoothly, most people fail to develop any interest in public affairs.
For radical social change—a change to a different social system—to take
place, there must be what is called a “crisis situation.” There must, in
short, be a breakdown of the existing system which calls forth a general
search for alternative solutions. When such a widespread search for
social alternatives takes place, then activists of a dissenting movement
must be available to supply that radical alternative, to relate the
crisis to the inherent defects of the system itself, and to point out
how the alternative system would solve the existing crisis and prevent
any similar breakdowns in the future. Hopefully, the dissenters would
also have provided a track record of predicting and warning against the
crisis that now exists.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn4)^

Furthermore, one of the characteristics of crisis situations is that
even the ruling elites begin to weaken their support for the system.
Because of the crisis, even part of the State begins to lose its zest
and enthusiasm for rule. In short, a failure of nerve by segments of the
State occurs. Thus, in these situations of breakdown, even members of
the ruling elite may convert to an alternative system or, at the least,
may lose their enthusiasm for the existing one.

Thus the historian Lawrence Stone stresses, as a requirement for radical
change, a decay in the will of the ruling elite. “The elite may lose its
manipulative skill, or its military superiority, or its self-confidence
or its cohesion; it may become estranged from the non-elite, or
overwhelmed by a financial crisis; it may be incompetent, or weak or
brutal.”^[5](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn5)^

## WHY LIBERTY WILL WIN [why-liberty-will-win]

Having set forth the libertarian creed and how it applies to vital
current problems, and having sketched which groups in society that creed
can be expected to attract and at what times, we must now assess the
future prospects for liberty. In particular, we must examine the firm
and growing conviction of the present author *not only* that
libertarianism will triumph eventually and in the long run, but also
that it will emerge victorious in a remarkably short period of time. For
I am convinced that the dark night of tyranny is ending, and that a new
dawn of liberty is now at hand.

Many libertarians are highly pessimistic about the prospects for
liberty. And if we focus on the growth of statism in the twentieth
century, and on the decline of classical liberalism that we adumbrated
in the introductory chapter, it is easy to fall prey to a pessimistic
prognosis. This pessimism may deepen further if we survey the history of
man and see the black record of despotism, tyranny, and exploitation in
civilization after civilization. We could be pardoned for thinking that
the classical-liberal upsurge of the seventeenth through the nineteenth
centuries in the West would prove to be an atypical burst of glory in
the grim annals of past and future history. But this would be succumbing
to the fallacy of what the Marxists call “impressionism”: a superficial
focus on the historical events themselves without a deeper analysis of
the causal laws and trends at work.

The case for libertarian optimism can be made in a series of what might
be called concentric circles, beginning with the broadest and
longest-run considerations and moving to the sharpest focus on short-run
trends. In the broadest and longest-run sense, libertarianism will win
eventually because it and only it is compatible with the nature of man
and of the world. Only liberty can achieve man’s prosperity,
fulfillment, and happiness. In short, libertarianism will win because it
is true, because it is the correct policy for mankind, and truth will
eventually win out.

But such long-run considerations may be very long indeed, and waiting
many centuries for truth to prevail may be small consolation for those
of us living at any particular moment in history. Fortunately, there is
a shorter-run reason for hope, particularly one that allows us to
dismiss the grim record of pre-eighteenth-century history as no longer
relevant to the future prospects of liberty.

Our contention here is that history made a great leap, a sea-change,
when the classical-liberal revolutions propelled us into the Industrial
Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn6)^ For in the preindustrial
world, the world of the Old Order and the peasant economy, there was no
reason why the reign of despotism could not continue indefinitely, for
many centuries. The peasants grew the food, and the kings, nobles, and
feudal landlords extracted all of the peasants’ surplus above what was
necessary to keep them all alive and working. As brutish, exploitative,
and dismal as agrarian despotism was, it could survive, for two main
reasons: (1) the economy could readily be maintained, even though at
subsistence level; and (2) because the masses knew no better, had never
experienced a better system, and hence could be induced to keep serving
as beasts of burden for their lords.

But the Industrial Revolution was a great leap in history, because it
created conditions and expectations which were irreversible. For the
first time in the history of the world, the Industrial Revolution
created a society where the standard of living of the masses leapt up
from subsistence and rose to previously unheard-of heights. The
population of the West, previously stagnant, now proliferated to take
advantage of the greatly increased opportunities for jobs and the good
life.

The clock cannot be turned back to a preindustrial age. Not only would
the masses not permit such a drastic reversal of their expectations for
a rising standard of living, but return to an agrarian world would mean
the starvation and death of the great bulk of the current population. We
are stuck with the industrial age, whether we like it or not.

But if that is true, then the cause of liberty is secured. For economic
science has shown, as we have partially demonstrated in this book, that
*only* freedom and a free market can run an industrial economy. In
short, while a free economy and a free society would be desirable and
just in a preindustrial world, in an industrial world it is also a vital
*necessity.* For, as Ludwig von Mises and other economists have shown,
in an industrial economy statism simply does not work. Hence, given a
universal commitment to an industrial world, it will eventually—and a
much sooner “eventually” than the simple emergence of truth—become clear
that the world will have to adopt freedom and the free market as the
requisite for industry to survive and flourish. It was this insight that
Herbert Spencer and other nineteenth-century libertarians were
perceiving in their distinction between the “military” and the
“industrial” society, between a society of “status” and a society of
“contract.” In the twentieth century, Mises demonstrated (a) that all
statist intervention distorts and cripples the market and leads, if not
reversed, to socialism; and (b) that socialism is a disaster because it
cannot plan an industrial economy for lack of profit-and-loss
incentives, and for lack of a genuine price system or property rights in
capital, land, and other means of production. In short, as Mises
predicted, neither socialism nor the various intermediary forms of
statism and interventionism can work. Hence, given a general commitment
to an industrial economy, these forms of statism would have to be
discarded, and be replaced by freedom and free markets.

Now this was a much shorter run than simply waiting for the truth, but
to the classical liberals at the turn of the twentieth century—the
Sumners, Spencers, and Paretos—it seemed like an unbearably long run
indeed. And they cannot be blamed, for they were witnessing the decline
of classical liberalism and the birth of the new despotic forms which
they opposed so strongly and steadfastly. They were, alas! present at
the creation. The world would have to wait, if not centuries then at
least decades, for socialism and corporate statism to be shown up as
utter failures.

But the long run is now here. We do not have to prophesy the ruinous
effects of statism; they are here at every hand. Lord Keynes once
scoffed at criticisms by free-market economists that his inflationist
policies would be ruinous in the long run; in his famous reply, he
chortled that “in the long run we are all dead.” But now *Keynes* is
dead and we are alive, living in *his* long run. The statist chickens
have come home to roost.

At the turn of the twentieth century, and for decades thereafter, things
were not nearly that clear. Statist intervention, in its various forms,
tried to preserve and even extend an industrial economy while scuttling
the very requirements of freedom and the free market which in the long
run are necessary for its survival. For half a century, statist
intervention could wreak its depredations through planning, controls,
high and crippling taxation, and paper money inflation without causing
clear and *evident* crises and dislocations. For the free-market
industrialization of the nineteenth century had created a vast cushion
of “fat” in the economy against such depredations. The government could
impose taxes, restrictions, and inflation upon the system and not reap
rapid and evidently bad effects.

But now statism has advanced so far and been in power so long that the
cushion is worn thin; as Mises pointed out as long ago as the 1940s, the
“reserve fund” created by laissez-faire has been “exhausted.” So that
now, whatever the government does brings about an instant negative
feedback—ill effects that are evident to all, even to many of the most
ardent apologists for statism.

In the Communist countries of Eastern Europe, the Communists themselves
have increasingly perceived that socialist central planning simply does
not work for an industrial economy. Hence the rapid retreat, in recent
years, away from central planning and toward free markets, especially in
Yugoslavia. In the Western world, too, State capitalism is everywhere in
crisis as it becomes clear that, in the most profound way, the
government has run out of money: increasing taxes will cripple industry
and incentives beyond repair, while increased creation of new money will
lead to a disastrous runaway inflation. And so we hear more and more
about the “necessity of lowered expectations from government” from among
the State’s once most ardent champions. In West Germany, the Social
Democratic party has long since abandoned the call for socialism. In
Great Britain, suffering from a tax-crippled economy and aggravated
inflation—what even the British are calling the “English disease—the
Tory party, for years in the hands of dedicated statists, has now been
taken over by a free-market-oriented faction, while even the Labor party
has been drawing back from the planned chaos of galloping statism.

But it is in the United States that we can be particularly optimistic,
for here we can narrow the circle of optimism to a short-run dimension.
Indeed, we can confidently say that the United States has now entered a
permanent crisis situation, and we can even pinpoint the years of origin
of that crisis: 1973–1975. Happily for the cause of liberty, not only
has a crisis of statism arrived in the United States, but it has
fortuitously struck across the board of society, in many different
spheres of life at about the same time. Hence, these breakdowns of
statism have had a synergistic effect, reinforcing each other in their
cumulative impact. And not only have they been crises of statism, but
they are perceived by everyone to be caused by statism, and not by the
free market, public greed, or whatever. And finally, these crises can
only be alleviated by getting the government out of the picture. All we
need are libertarians to point the way.

Let us quickly run down these areas of systemic crisis and see how many
of them dovetailed in 1973–1975 and in the years since. From the fall of
1973 through 1975 the United States experienced an inflationary
depression, after 40 years of alleged Keynesian fine-tuning which was
supposed to eliminate both problems for all time. It was also in this
period that inflation reached frightening, double-digit proportions.

It was, furthermore, in 1975 that New York City experienced its first
great debt crisis, a crisis that resulted in partial default. The dread
*name* “default” was avoided, to be sure; the virtual act of bankruptcy
was instead called a “stretchout” (forcing short-term creditors to
accept long-term New York City bonds). This crisis is only the first of
many state and local bond defaults across the country. For state and
local governments will be increasingly forced into unpleasant “crisis”
choices: between radical cuts in expenditure, higher taxes that will
drive businesses and middle-class citizens out of the area, and
defaulting on debt.

Since the early 1970s, too, it has become increasingly clear that high
taxes on income, savings, and investment have been crippling business
activity and productivity. Accountants are only now beginning to realize
that these taxes, combined especially with inflationary distortions of
business calculation, have led to an increasing scarcity of capital, and
to an imminent danger of consuming America’s vital stock of capital
without even realizing it.

Tax rebellions are sweeping the country, reacting against high property,
income, and sales taxes. And it is safe to say that any further
increases in taxes would be politically suicidal for politicians at
every level of government.

The Social Security system, once so sacred in American opinion that it
was literally above criticism, is now seen to be as fully in disrepair
as libertarian and free-market writers have long warned. Even the
Establishment *now* recognizes that the Social Security system is
bankrupt, that it is in no sense a genuine “insurance” scheme.

Regulation of industry is increasingly seen to be such a failure that
even such statists as Senator Edward Kennedy have been calling for
deregulation of the airlines; there has even been considerable talk
about abolition of the ICC and CAB.

On the social front, the once sacrosanct public school system has come
under increasing fire. Public schools, necessarily making educational
decisions for the entire community, have been generating intense social
conflicts: over race, sex, religion, and the content of learning.
Government practices on crime and incarceration are under increasing
fire: the libertarian Dr. Thomas Szasz has almost single-handedly
managed to free many citizens from involuntary commitment, while the
government now concedes that its cherished policy of trying to
“rehabilitate” criminals is an abject failure. There has been a total
breakdown of enforcement of such drug laws as prohibition of marijuana
and laws against various forms of sexual relations. Sentiment is rising
across the nation for repeal of all victimless crime laws, that is, laws
that designate crimes where there are no victims. It is increasingly
seen that attempts at enforcement of these laws can only bring about
hardship and a virtual police state. The time is fast approaching when
prohibitionism in areas of personal morality will be seen to be as
ineffective and unjust as it was in the case of alcohol.

Along with the disastrous consequences of statism on the economic and
social fronts, there came the traumatic defeat in Vietnam, culminating
in 1975. The utter failure of American intervention in Vietnam has led
to a growing reexamination of the entire interventionist foreign policy
that the United States has been pursuing since Woodrow Wilson and
Franklin D. Roosevelt. The growing view that American power must be cut
back, that the American government cannot successfully run the world, is
the “neoisolationist” analogue of cutting back the interventions of Big
Government at home. While America’s foreign policy is still aggressively
globalist, this neoisolationist sentiment did succeed in limiting
American intervention in Angola during 1976.

Perhaps the best sign of all, the most favorable indication of the
breakdown of the mystique of the American State, of its moral
groundwork, was the Watergate exposures of 1973–1974. It is Watergate
that gives us the greatest single hope for the short-run victory of
liberty in America. For Watergate, as politicians have been warning us
ever since, destroyed the public’s “faith in government”—and it was high
time, too. Watergate engendered a radical shift in the deep-seated
attitudes of *everyone*—regardless of their explicit ideology—toward
government itself. For in the first place, Watergate awakened everyone
to the invasions of personal liberty and private property by
government—to its bugging, drugging, wiretapping, mail covering, agents
provocateurs—even assassinations. Watergate at last desanctified our
previously sacrosanct FBI and CIA and caused them to be looked at
clearly and coolly. But more important, by bringing about the
impeachment of the President, Watergate permanently desanctified an
office that had come to be virtually considered as sovereign by the
American public. No longer will the President be considered above the
law; no longer will the President be able to do no wrong.

But most important of all, government *itself* has been largely
desanctified in America. No one trusts politicians or government
anymore; all government is viewed with abiding hostility, thus returning
us to that state of healthy distrust of government that marked the
American public and the American revolutionaries of the eighteenth
century.

For a while, it looked as if Jimmy Carter might be able to accomplish
his declared task of bringing back people’s faith and trust in
government. But, thanks to the Bert Lance fiasco and to other
peccadilloes, Carter has fortunately failed. The permanent crisis of
government continues.

The conditions are therefore ripe, now and in the future in the United
States, for the triumph of liberty. All that is needed is a growing and
vibrant libertarian movement to explain this systemic crisis and to
point out the libertarian path out of our government-created morass.
But, as we have seen at the beginning of this work, that is precisely
what we have been getting. And now we come, at last, to our promised
answer to the question we posed in our introductory chapter: Why *now?*
If America has a deep-seated heritage of libertarian values, why have
they surfaced *now*, in the last four or five years?

Our answer is that the emergence and rapid growth of the libertarian
movement is no accident, that it is a function of the crisis situation
that struck America in 1973–1975 and has continued ever since. Crisis
situations always stimulate interest and a search for solutions. And
this crisis has inspired numbers of thinking Americans to realize that
government has gotten us into this mess, and that only liberty—the
rolling back of government—can get us out. We are growing because the
conditions are ripe. In a sense, as on the free market, demand has
created its own supply.

And so that is why the Libertarian party received 174,000 votes in its
first try for national office in 1976. And that is why the authoritative
newsletter on Washington politics, *The Baron Report*—a report that is
in no sense libertarian-oriented—denied in a recent issue, media claims
of a current trend toward conservatism in the electorate. The report
points out, to the contrary, that “if any trend in opinion is evident,
it’s toward libertarianism—the philosophy that argues against government
intervention and for personal rights.” The report adds that
libertarianism has an appeal to both ends of the political spectrum:
“Conservatives welcome that trend when it indicates public skepticism
over federal programs; liberals welcome it when it shows growing
acceptance of individual rights in such areas as drugs, sexual behavior,
etc., and increasing reticence of the public to support foreign
intervention.”^[7](#24-notes.html#chap15_fn7)^

## TOWARD A FREE AMERICA [23-chap15.html#page402]

The libertarian creed, finally, offers the fulfillment of the best of
the American past along with the promise of a far better future. Even
more than conservatives, who are often attached to the monarchical
traditions of a happily obsolete European past, libertarians are
squarely in the great classical-liberal tradition that built the United
States and bestowed on us the American heritage of individual liberty, a
peaceful foreign policy, minimal government, and a free-market economy.
Libertarians are the only genuine current heirs of Jefferson, Paine,
Jackson, and the abolitionists.

And yet, while we are more truly traditional and more rootedly American
than the conservatives, we are in some ways more radical than the
radicals. *Not* in the sense that we have either the desire or the hope
of remoulding human nature by the path of politics; but in the sense
that only we provide the really sharp and genuine break with the
encroaching statism of the twentieth century. The Old Left wants only
more of what we are suffering from now; the New Left, in the last
analysis, proposes only still more aggravated statism or compulsory
egalitarianism and uniformity. Libertarianism is the logical culmination
of the now forgotten “Old Right” (of the 1930s and ‘40s) opposition to
the New Deal, war, centralization, and State intervention. Only we wish
to break with *all* aspects of the liberal State: with its welfare *and*
its warfare, its monopoly privileges *and* its egalitarianism, its
repression of victimless crimes whether personal *or* economic. Only we
offer technology without technocracy, growth without pollution, liberty
without chaos, law without tyranny, the defense of property rights in
one’s person *and* in one’s material possessions.

Strands and remnants of libertarian doctrines are, indeed, all around
us, in large parts of our glorious past and in values and ideas in the
confused present. But only libertarianism takes these strands and
remnants and integrates them into a mighty, logical, and consistent
system. The enormous success of Karl Marx and Marxism has been due not
to the validity of his ideas—all of which, indeed, are fallacious—but to
the fact that he dared to weave socialist theory into a mighty system.
Liberty cannot succeed without an equivalent and contrasting systematic
theory; and until the last few years, despite our great heritage of
economic and political thought and practice, we have not had a fully
integrated and consistent theory of liberty. We now have that systematic
theory; we come, fully armed with our knowledge, prepared to bring our
message and to capture the imagination of all groups and strands in the
population. All other theories and systems have clearly failed:
socialism is in retreat everywhere, and notably in Eastern Europe;
liberalism has bogged us down in a host of insoluble problems;
conservatism has nothing to offer but sterile defense of the status quo.
Liberty has never been fully tried in the modern world; libertarians now
propose to fulfill the American dream and the world dream of liberty and
prosperity for all mankind.
