# 11 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, II: STREETS AND ROADS [18-chap11.html#page249]

## PROTECTING THE STREETS [protecting-the-streets]

Abolition of the public sector means, of course, that *all* pieces of
land, all land areas, including streets and roads, would be owned
privately, by individuals, corporations, cooperatives, or any other
voluntary groupings of individuals and capital. The fact that all
streets and land areas would be private would by itself solve many of
the seemingly insoluble problems of private operation. What we need to
do is to reorient our thinking to consider a world in which all land
areas are privately owned.

Let us take, for example, police protection. How would police protection
be furnished in a totally private economy? *Part* of the answer becomes
evident if we consider a world of totally private land and street
ownership. Consider the Times Square area of New York City, a
notoriously crime-ridden area where there is little police protection
furnished by the city authorities. Every New Yorker knows, in fact, that
he lives and walks the streets, and not only Times Square, virtually in
a state of “anarchy,” dependent solely on the normal peacefulness and
good will of his fellow citizens. Police protection in New York is
minimal, a fact dramatically revealed in a recent week-long police
strike when, lo and behold!, crime in no way increased from its normal
state when the police are supposedly alert and on the job. At any rate,
suppose that the Times Square area, including the streets, was privately
owned, say by the “Times Square Merchants Association.” The merchants
would know full well, of course, that if crime was rampant in their
area, if muggings and holdups abounded, then their customers would fade
away and would patronize competing areas and neighborhoods. Hence, it
would be to the economic interest of the merchants’ association to
supply efficient and plentiful police protection, so that customers
would be attracted to, rather than repelled from, their neighborhood.
Private business, after all, is always trying to attract and keep its
customers. But what good would be served by attractive store displays
and packaging, pleasant lighting and courteous service, if the customers
may be robbed or assaulted if they walk through the area?

The merchants’ association, furthermore, would be induced, by their
drive for profits and for avoiding losses, to supply not only sufficient
police protection but also courteous and pleasant protection.
Governmental police have not only no incentive to be efficient or worry
about their “customers’” needs; they also live with the ever-present
temptation to wield their power of force in a brutal and coercive
manner. “Police brutality” is a well-known feature of the police system,
and it is held in check only by remote complaints of the harassed
citizenry. But if the private merchants’ police should yield to the
temptation of brutalizing the merchants’ customers, those customers will
quickly disappear and go elsewhere. Hence, the merchants’ association
will see to it that its police are courteous as well as plentiful.

Such efficient and high-quality police protection would prevail
throughout the land, throughout all the private streets and land areas.
Factories would guard their street areas, merchants their streets, and
road companies would provide safe and efficient police protection for
their toll roads and other privately owned roads. The same would be true
for residential neighborhoods. We can envision two possible types of
private street ownership in such neighborhoods. In one type, all the
landowners in a certain block might become the joint *owners* of that
block, let us say as the “85th St. Block Company.” This company would
then provide police protection, the costs being paid either by the
homeowners directly or out of tenants’ rent if the street includes
rental apartments. Again, homeowners will of course have a direct
interest in seeing that their block is safe, while landlords will try to
attract tenants by supplying safe streets in addition to the more usual
services such as heat, water, and janitorial service. To ask *why*
landlords should provide safe streets in the libertarian, fully private
society is just as silly as asking *now* why they should provide their
tenants with heat or hot water. The force of competition and of consumer
demand would make them supply such services. Furthermore, whether we are
considering homeowners or rental housing, in *either case* the capital
value of the land and the house will be a function of the safety of the
street as well as of the other well-known characteristics of the house
and the neighborhood. Safe and well-patrolled streets will raise the
value of the landowners’ land and houses in the same way as well-tended
houses do; crime-ridden streets will lower the value of the land and
houses as surely as dilapidated housing itself does. Since landowners
always prefer higher to lower market values for their property, there is
a built-in incentive to provide efficient, well-paved, and safe streets.

Another type of private street-ownership in residential areas might be
private street companies, which would own only the streets, not the
houses or buildings on them. The street companies would then charge
landowners for the service of maintaining, improving, and policing their
streets. Once again, safe, well-lit, and well-paved streets will induce
landowners and tenants to flock to those streets; unsafe, badly lit and
badly maintained streets will drive those owners and users away. A happy
and flourishing use of the streets by landlords and automobiles will
raise the profits and stock values of the street companies; an unhappy
and decaying regard for streets by their owners will drive the users
away and lower the profits and the stock values of the private street
companies. Hence, the street-owning companies will do their best to
provide efficient street service, including police protection, to secure
happy users; they will be driven to do this by their desire to make
profits and to increase the value of their capital, and by their equally
active desire not to suffer losses and erosion of their capital. It is
infinitely better to rely on the pursuit of economic interest by
landowners or street companies than to depend on the dubious “altruism”
of bureaucrats and government officials.

At this point in the discussion, someone is bound to raise the question:
If streets are owned by street companies, and granting that they
generally would aim to please their customers with maximum efficiency,
what if some kooky or tyrannical street owner should suddenly decide to
block access to his street to an adjoining homeowner? How could the
latter get in or out? Could he be blocked permanently, or be charged an
enormous amount to be allowed entrance or exit? The answer to this
question is the same as to a similar problem about land-ownership:
Suppose that everyone owning homes surrounding someone’s property would
suddenly not allow him to go in or out? The answer is that everyone, in
purchasing homes or street service in a libertarian society, would make
sure that the purchase or lease contract provides full access for
whatever term of years is specified. With this sort of “easement”
provided in advance by contract, no such sudden blockade would be
allowed, since it would be an invasion of the property right of the
landowner.

There is of course nothing new or startling in the *principle* of this
envisioned libertarian society. We are already familiar with the
energizing effects of inter-location and inter-transportation
competition. For example, when the private railroads were being built
throughout the nation in the nineteenth century, the railroads and their
competition provided a remarkable energizing force for developing their
respective areas. Each railroad tried its best to induce immigration and
economic development in its area in order to increase its profits, land
values, and value of its capital; and each hastened to do so, lest
people and markets leave their area and move to the ports, cities, and
lands served by competing railroads. The same principle would be at work
if all streets and roads were private as well. Similarly, we are already
familiar with police protection provided by private merchants and
organizations. *Within* their property, stores provide guards and
watchmen; banks provide guards; factories employ watchmen; shopping
centers retain guards, etc. The libertarian society would simply extend
this healthy and functioning system to the *streets* as well. It is
scarcely accidental that there are far more assaults and muggings on the
*streets* outside stores than in the stores themselves; this is because
the stores are supplied with watchful private guards while on the
streets we must all rely on the “anarchy” of government police
protection. Indeed, in various blocks of New York City there has already
arisen in recent years, in response to the galloping crime problem, the
hiring of private guards to patrol the blocks by voluntary contributions
of the landlords and homeowners on that block. Crime on these blocks has
already been substantially reduced. The problem is that these efforts
have been halting and inefficient because those streets are not *owned*
by the residents, and hence there is no effective mechanism for
gathering the capital to provide efficient protection on a permanent
basis. Furthermore, the patrolling street guards cannot legally be armed
because they are not on their owners’ property, and they cannot, as
store or other property owners can, challenge anyone acting in a
suspicious but not yet criminal manner. They cannot, in short, do the
things, financially or administratively, that *owners* can do with their
property.

Furthermore, police paid for by the landowners and residents of a block
or neighborhood would not only end police brutality against customers;
this system would end the current spectacle of police being considered
by many communities as alien “imperial” colonizers, there not to serve
but to oppress the community. In America today, for example, we have the
general rule in our cities of black areas patrolled by police hired by
central urban governments, governments that are perceived to be alien to
the black communities. Police supplied, controlled, and paid for by the
residents and landowners of the communities themselves would be a
completely different story; they would be supplying, and perceived to be
supplying, services to their customers rather than coercing them on
behalf of an alien authority.

A dramatic contrast of the merits of public vs. private protection is
provided by one block in Harlem. On West 135th Street between Seventh
and Eighth Avenues is the station house of the 82nd Precinct of the New
York City Police Department. Yet the august presence of the station
house did not prevent a rash of night robberies of various stores on the
block. Finally, in the winter of 1966, 15 merchants on the block banded
together to hire a guard to walk the block all night; the guard was
hired from the Leroy V. George protection company to provide the police
protection not forthcoming from their property
taxes.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn1)^

The most successful and best organized private police forces in American
history have been the railway police, maintained by many railroads to
prevent injury or theft to passengers or freight. The modern railway
police were founded at the end of World War I by the Protection Section
of the American Railway Association. So well did they function that by
1929 freight claim payments for robberies had declined by 93 percent.
Arrests by the railway police, who at the time of the major study of
their activities in the early 1930s totalled 10,000 men, resulted in a
far higher percentage of convictions than earned by police departments,
ranging from 83 percent to 97 percent. Railway police were armed, could
make normal arrests, and were portrayed by an unsympathetic
criminologist as having a widespread reputation for good character and
ability.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn2)^

## STREET RULES [18-chap11.html#page255]

One of the undoubted consequences of all land areas in the country being
owned by private individuals and companies would be a greater richness
and diversity of American neighborhoods. The character of the police
protection and the rules applied by the private police would depend on
the wishes of the landowners or street owners, the owners of the given
area. Thus, suspicious residential neighborhoods would insist that any
people or cars entering the area have a prior appointment with a
resident, or else be approved by a resident with a phone call from the
gate. In short, the same rules for street property would be applied as
are now often applied in private apartment buildings or family estates.
In other, more raffish areas, everyone would be permitted to enter at
will, and there might be varying degrees of surveillance in between.
Most probably commercial areas, anxious not to rebuff customers, would
be open to all. All this would give full scope to the desires and values
of the residents and owners of all the numerous areas in the country.

It might be charged that all this will allow freedom “to discriminate”
in housing or use of the streets. There is no question about that.
Fundamental to the libertarian creed is every man’s right to choose who
shall enter or use his own property, provided of course that the other
person is willing.

“Discrimination,” in the sense of choosing favorably or unfavorably in
accordance with whatever criteria a person may employ, is an integral
part of freedom of choice, and hence of a free society. But of course in
the free market any such discrimination is costly, and will have to be
paid for by the property owner concerned.

Suppose, for example, that someone in a free society is a landlord of a
house or a block of houses. He *could* simply charge the free market
rent and let it go at that. But then there are risks; he may choose to
discriminate against renting to couples with young children, figuring
that there is substantial risk of defacing his property. On the other
hand, he may well choose to charge extra rent to compensate for the
higher risk, so that the free-market rent for such families will tend to
be higher than otherwise. This, in fact, will happen in most cases on
the free market. But what of personal, rather than strictly economic,
“discrimination” by the landlord? Suppose, for example, that the
landlord is a great admirer of six-foot Swedish-Americans, and decides
to rent his apartments only to families of such a group. In the free
society it would be fully in his right to do so, but he would clearly
suffer a large monetary loss as a result. For this means that he would
have to turn away tenant after tenant in an endless quest for very tall
Swedish-Americans. While this may be considered an extreme example, the
effect is exactly the same, though differing in degree, for any sort of
personal discrimination in the marketplace. If, for example, the
landlord dislikes redheads and determines not to rent his apartments to
them, he will suffer losses, although not as severely as in the first
example.

In any case, anytime anyone practices such “discrimination” in the free
market, he must bear the costs, either of losing profits or of losing
services as a consumer. If a consumer decides to boycott goods sold by
people he does not like, whether the dislike is justified or not, he
then will go without goods or services which he otherwise would have
purchased.

All property owners, then, in a free society, would set down the rules
for use of, or admission to, their property. The more rigorous the rules
the fewer the people who will engage in such use, and the property owner
will then have to balance rigor of admission as against loss of income.
A landlord might “discriminate,” for example, by insisting, as George
Pullman did in his “company town” in Illinois in the late nineteenth
century, that all his tenants appear at all times dressed in jacket and
tie; he might do so, but it is doubtful that many tenants would elect to
move into or remain in such a building or development and the landlord
would suffer severe losses.

The principle that property is administered by its owners also provides
the rebuttal to a standard argument for government intervention in the
economy. The argument holds that “after all, the government sets down
traffic rules—red and green lights, driving on the right-hand side,
maximum speed limits, etc. Surely everyone must admit that traffic would
degenerate into chaos if not for such rules. Therefore, why should
government not intervene in the rest of the economy as well?” The
fallacy here is not that traffic should be regulated; of course such
rules are necessary. But the crucial point is that such rules will
always be laid down by whoever owns and therefore administers the roads.
Government has been laying down traffic rules because it is the
government that has always owned and therefore run the streets and
roads; in a libertarian society of private ownership the *private*
owners would lay down the rules for the use of their roads.

However, might not the traffic rules be “chaotic” in a purely free
society? Wouldn’t some owners designate red for “stop,” others green or
blue, etc.? Wouldn’t some roads be used on the right-hand side and
others on the left? Such questions are absurd. Obviously, it would be to
the interest of all road owners to have uniform rules in these matters,
so that road traffic could mesh smoothly and without difficulty. Any
maverick road owner who insisted on a left-hand drive or green for
“stop” instead of “go” would soon find himself with numerous accidents,
and the disappearance of customers and users. The private railroads in
nineteenth-century America faced similar problems and solved them
harmoniously and without difficulty. Railroads allowed each other’s cars
on their tracks; they inter-connected with each other for mutual
benefit; the gauges of the different railroads were adjusted to be
uniform; and uniform regional freight classifications were worked out
for 6,000 items. Furthermore, it was the railroads and not government
that took the initiative to consolidate the unruly and chaotic patchwork
of time zones that had existed previously. In order to have accurate
scheduling and timetables, the railroads *had* to consolidate; and in
1883 they agreed to consolidate the existing 54 time zones across the
country into the four which we have today. The New York financial paper,
the *Commercial and Financial Chronicle*, exclaimed that “the laws of
trade and the instinct for self-preservation effect reforms and
improvements that all the legislative bodies combined could not
accomplish.”^[3](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn3)^

## PRICING STREETS AND ROADS [pricing-streets-and-roads]

If, in contrast, we examine the performance of governmental streets and
highways in America, it is difficult to see how private ownership could
pile up a more inefficient or irrational record. It is now widely
recognized, for example, that federal and state governments, spurred by
the lobbying of automobile companies, oil companies, tire companies, and
construction contractors and unions, have indulged in a vast
over-expansion of highways. The highways grant gross subsidies to the
users and have played the major role in killing railroads as a viable
enterprise. Thus, trucks can operate on a right-of-way constructed and
maintained by the taxpayer, while railroads had to build and maintain
their own trackage. Furthermore, the subsidized highway and road
programs led to an overexpansion of automobile-using suburbs, the
coerced bulldozing of countless homes and businesses, and an artificial
burdening of the central cities. The cost to the taxpayer and to the
economy has been enormous.

Particularly subsidized has been the urban auto-using commuter, and it
is precisely in the cities where traffic congestion has burgeoned along
with this subsidy to overaccumulation of their traffic. Professor
William Vickrey of Columbia University has estimated that urban
expressways have been built at a cost of from 6 cents to 27 cents per
vehicle-mile, while users pay in gasoline and other auto taxes only
about 1 cent per vehicle-mile. The general taxpayer rather than the
motorist pays for maintenance of urban streets. Furthermore, the
gasoline tax is paid per mile regardless of the particular street or
highway being used, and regardless of the time of day of the ride.
Hence, when highways are financed from the general gasoline tax fund,
the users of the low-cost rural highways are being taxed in order to
subsidize the users of the far higher-cost urban expressways. Rural
highways typically cost only 2 cents per vehicle-mile to build and
maintain.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn4)^

In addition, the gasoline tax is scarcely a rational pricing system for
the use of the roads, and no private firms would ever price the use of
roads in that way. Private business prices its goods and services to
“clear the market,” so that supply equals demand, and there are neither
shortages nor goods going unsold. The fact that gasoline taxes are paid
per mile regardless of the road means that the more highly demanded
urban streets and highways are facing a situation where the price
charged is far below the free-market price. The result is enormous and
aggravated traffic congestion on the heavily traveled streets and roads,
especially in rush hours, and a virtually unused network of roads in
rural areas. A rational pricing system would at the same time maximize
profits for road owners and always provide clear streets free of
congestion. In the current system, the government holds the price to
users of congested roads extremely low and far below the free-market
price; the result is a chronic shortage of road space reflected in
traffic congestion. The government has invariably tried to meet this
growing problem not by rational pricing but by building still more
roads, socking the taxpayer for yet greater subsidies to drivers, and
thereby making the shortage still worse. Frantically increasing the
supply while holding the price of use far below the market simply leads
to chronic and aggravated congestion.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn5)^ It
is like a dog chasing a mechanical rabbit. Thus, the *Washington Post*
has traced the impact of the federal highway program in the nation’s
capital:

> Washington’s Capital Beltway was one of the first major links in the
> system to be completed. When the last section was opened in the summer
> of 1964, it was hailed as one of the finest highways ever built.
>
> It was expected to (a) relieve traffic congestion in downtown
> Washington by providing a bypass for north-south traffic and (b) knit
> together the suburban counties and cities ringing the capital.
>
> What the Beltway actually became was (a) a commuter highway and local
> traffic circulator and (b) the cause of an enormous building boom that
> accelerated the flight of the white and the affluent from the central
> city.
>
> Instead of relieving traffic congestion, the Beltway has increased it.
> Along with I-95, 70-S, and I-66, it has made it possible for commuters
> to move farther and farther from their downtown jobs.
>
> It has also led to relocation of government agencies and retail and
> service firms from downtown to the suburbs, putting the jobs they
> create out of reach of many inner city
> dwellers.^[6](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn6)^

What would a rational pricing system, a system instituted by private
road owners, look like? In the first place, highways would charge tolls,
especially at such convenient entrances to cities as bridges and
tunnels, but not as is charged now. For example, toll charges would be
much higher at rush-hour and other peak-hour traffic (e.g., Sundays in
the summer) than in off-hours. In a free market, the greater demand at
peak hours would lead to higher toll charges, until congestion would be
eliminated and the flow of traffic steady. But people *have* to go to
work, the reader will ask? Surely, but they don’t *have* to go in their
own cars. Some commuters will give up altogether and move back to the
city; others will go in car pools; still others will ride in express
busses or trains. In this way, use of the roads at peak hours would be
restricted to those most willing to pay the market-clearing price for
their use. Others, too, will endeavor to shift their times of work so as
to come in and leave at staggered hours. Weekenders would also drive
less or stagger their hours. Finally, the higher profits to be earned
from, say, bridges and tunnels, will lead private firms to build more of
them. Road building will be governed not by the clamor of pressure
groups and users for subsidies, but by the efficient demand and cost
calculations of the marketplace.

While many people can envision the working of private *highways*, they
boggle at the thought of private urban streets. How would *they* be
priced? Would there be toll gates at every block? Obviously not, for
such a system would be clearly uneconomic, prohibitively costly to the
owner and driver alike. In the first place, the street owners will price
*parking* far more rationally than at present. They will price parking
on congested downtown streets very heavily, in response to the enormous
demand. And contrary to common practice nowadays, they will charge
proportionately far *more* rather than less for longer, all-day parking.
In short, the street owners will try to induce rapid turnover in the
congested areas. All right for parking; again, this is readily
understandable. But what about *driving* on congested urban streets? How
could this be priced? There are numerous possible ways. In the first
place the downtown street owners might require anyone driving on their
streets to buy a license, which could be displayed on the car as
licenses and stickers are now. But, furthermore, they might require
anyone driving at peak hours to buy and display an extra, very costly
license. There are other ways. Modern technology may make feasible the
requirement that all cars equip themselves with a meter, a meter which
will not only click away per mile, but may speed up in a predetermined
manner on congested streets and roads at peak hours. Then the car owner
could receive a bill at the end of the month. A similar plan was set
forth a decade ago by Professor A.A. Walters:

> The particular administrative instruments which might be used
> include... special mileometers (similar to those used by taxis). ...
> The special mileometers would record mileage when the “flag” is up and
> a charge would be levied on this mileage. This would be suitable for
> large urban areas such as New York, London, Chicago, etc. “Flag-up”
> streets could be specified for certain hours of the day. Vehicles
> might be allowed to travel on those streets without a special
> mileometer provided that they bought and displayed a daily “sticker.”
> The occasional traffic on “sticker” authority would have been charged
> more than the maximum amount paid by those on mileometer authority.
> The supervision of the scheme would be fairly simple. Cameras could be
> set up to record those cars without sticker or flag, and a suitable
> fine could be levied for
> contravention.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn7)^

Professor Vickrey has also suggested that TV cameras at the
intersections of the most congested streets could record the license
numbers of all cars, with motorists sent a bill each month in proportion
to all the times that they crossed the intersection. Alternatively, he
proposed that each car could be equipped with the Oxford electronic
metering device; each car would then emit its own unique signal which
would be picked up by the device placed at the given
intersection.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn8)^

In any case, the problem of rational pricing for streets and highways
would be an easy one for private enterprise and modern technology to
solve. Businessmen on the free market have readily solved far more
difficult problems; all that is needed is to allow them the room to
function.

If all transportation were set completely free, if the roads, airlines,
railroads, and waterways were freed of their labyrinthine networks of
subsidies, controls, and regulations in a purely private system, how
would the consumers allocate their transportation dollars? Would we
return to railroad travel, for example? The best estimates of cost and
demand for transportation predict that railroads would become the main
staple for long-haul freight, airlines for long-range passenger service,
trucks for short-haul freight, and busses for public commuter travel.
While railroads, in short, would stage a comeback for long-haul freight,
they would not be revivified for much passenger service. In recent
years, many liberals who have become disenchanted with the overbuilding
of highways have been calling for massive discouragement of highway use,
and the subsidizing and building of subways and commuter railways on a
vast scale for urban traffic. But these grandiose schemes ignore the
enormous expense and waste that would be involved. For even if many of
these highways should not have been built, they are *there*, and it
would be folly not to take advantage of them. In recent years, some
intelligent transportation economists have raised their voices against
the massive waste involved in constructing new rapid transit railroads
(such as in the San Francisco Bay area) and have called instead for
making use of the existing highways through employing express busses for
commuting.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn9)^

It is not difficult to envision a network of private, unsubsidized and
unregulated railroads and airlines; but could there be a system of
private roads? Could such a system be at all feasible? One answer is
that private roads have worked admirably in the past. In England before
the eighteenth century, for example, roads, invariably owned and
operated by local governments, were badly constructed and even more
badly maintained. These public roads could never have supported the
mighty Industrial Revolution that England experienced in the eighteenth
century, the “revolution” that ushered in the modern age. The vital task
of improving the almost impassable English roads was performed by
private turnpike companies, which, beginning in 1706, organized and
established the great network of roads which made England the envy of
the world. The owners of these private turnpike companies were generally
landowners, merchants, and industrialists in the area being served by
the road, and they recouped their costs by charging tolls at selected
tollgates. Often the collection of tolls was leased out for a year or
more to individuals selected by competitive bids at auction. It was
these private roads that developed an internal market in England, and
that greatly lowered the costs of transport of coal and other bulky
material. And since it was mutually beneficial for them to do so, the
turnpike companies linked up with each other to form an interconnected
road network throughout the land—all a result of private enterprise in
action.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn10)^

As in England, so in the United States a little later in time. Faced
again with virtually impassable roads built by local governmental units,
private companies built and financed a great turnpike network throughout
the northeastern states, from approximately 1800 to 1830. Once again,
private enterprise proved superior in road building and ownership to the
backward operations of government. The roads were built and operated by
private turnpike corporations, and tolls were charged to the users.
Again, the turnpike companies were largely financed by merchants and
property owners along the routes, and they voluntarily linked themselves
into an interconnected network of roads. And these turnpikes constituted
the first really good roads in the United
States.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap11_fn11)^

