# 12 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, III: POLICE, LAW, AND THE COURTS [19-chap12.html#page267]

## POLICE PROTECTION [police-protection]

The market and private enterprise do exist, and so most people can
readily envision a free market in most goods and services. Probably the
most difficult single area to grasp, however, is the abolition of
government operations in the service of protection: police, the courts,
etc.—the area encompassing defense of person and property against attack
or invasion. How could private enterprise and the free market possibly
provide such service? How could police, legal systems, judicial
services, law enforcement, prisons—how could these be provided in a free
market? We have already seen how a great deal of police protection, at
the least, could be supplied by the various owners of streets and land
areas. But we now need to examine this entire area systematically.

In the first place, there is a common fallacy, held even by most
advocates of laissez-faire, that the government must supply “police
protection,” as if police protection were a single, absolute entity, a
fixed quantity of something which the government supplies to all. But in
actual fact there is no absolute commodity called “police protection”
any more than there is an absolute single commodity called “food” or
“shelter.” It is true that everyone pays taxes for a seemingly fixed
quantity of protection, but this is a myth. In actual fact, there are
almost infinite degrees of all sorts of protection. For any given person
or business, the police can provide everything from a policeman on the
beat who patrols once a night, to two policemen patrolling constantly on
each block, to cruising patrol cars, to one or even several
round-the-clock personal bodyguards. Furthermore, there are many other
decisions the police must make, the complexity of which becomes evident
as soon as we look beneath the veil of the myth of absolute
“protection.” How shall the police allocate their funds which are, of
course, always limited as are the funds of all other individuals,
organizations, and agencies? How much shall the police invest in
electronic equipment? fingerprinting equipment? detectives as against
uniformed police? patrol cars as against foot police, etc.?

The point is that the government has no rational way to make these
allocations. The government only knows that it has a limited budget. Its
allocations of funds are then subject to the full play of politics,
boondoggling, and bureaucratic inefficiency, with no indication at all
as to whether the police department is serving the consumers in a way
responsive to their desires or whether it is doing so efficiently. The
situation would be different if police services were supplied on a free,
competitive market. In that case, consumers would pay for whatever
degree of protection they wish to purchase. The consumers who just want
to see a policeman once in a while would pay less than those who want
continuous patrolling, and far less than those who demand 24-hour
bodyguard service. On the free market, protection would be supplied in
proportion and in whatever way that the consumers wish to pay for it. A
drive for efficiency would be insured, as it always is on the market, by
the compulsion to make profits and avoid losses, and thereby to keep
costs low and to serve the highest demands of the consumers. Any police
firm that suffers from gross inefficiency would soon go bankrupt and
disappear.

One big problem a government police force must always face is: what laws
*really* to enforce? Police departments are theoretically faced with the
absolute injunction, “enforce all laws,” but in practice a limited
budget forces them to allocate their personnel and equipment to the most
urgent crimes. But the absolute dictum pursues them and works against a
rational allocation of resources. On the free market, what would be
enforced is whatever the customers are willing to pay for. Suppose, for
example, that Mr. Jones has a precious gem he believes might soon be
stolen. He can ask, and pay for, round-the-clock police protection at
whatever strength he may wish to work out with the police company. He
might, on the other hand, also have a private road on his estate he
doesn’t want many people to travel on—but he might not *care* very much
about trespassers on that road. In that case, he won’t devote any police
resources to protecting the road. As on the market in general, it is up
to the consumer—and since all of us are consumers this means each person
individually decides how much and what kind of protection he wants and
is willing to buy.

All that we have said about landowners’ police applies to private police
in general. Free-market police would not only be efficient, they would
have a strong incentive to be courteous and to refrain from brutality
against either their clients or their clients’ friends or customers. A
private Central Park would be guarded efficiently in order to maximize
park revenue, rather than have a prohibitive curfew imposed on
innocent—and paying—customers. A free market in police would reward
efficient and courteous police protection to customers and penalize any
falling off from this standard. No longer would there be the current
disjunction between service and payment inherent in all government
operations, a disjunction which means that police, like all other
government agencies, acquire their revenue, not voluntarily and
competitively from consumers, but from the taxpayers coercively.

In fact, as government police have become increasingly inefficient,
consumers have been turning more and more to private forms of
protection. We have already mentioned block or neighborhood protection.
There are also private guards, insurance companies, private detectives,
and such increasingly sophisticated equipment as safes, locks, and
closed-circuit TV and burglar alarms. The President’s Commission on Law
Enforcement and the Administration of Justice estimated in 1969 that
government police cost the American public \$2.8 billion a year, while
it spends \$1.35 billion on private protection service and another \$200
million on equipment, so that private protection expenses amounted to
over half the outlay on government police. These figures should give
pause to those credulous folk who believe that police protection is
somehow, by some mystic right or power, necessarily and forevermore an
attribute of State sovereignty.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn1)^

Every reader of detective fiction knows that private insurance
detectives are far more efficient than the police in recovering stolen
property. Not only is the insurance company impelled by economics to
serve the consumer—and thereby try to avoid paying benefits—but the
major focus of the insurance company is very different from that of the
police. The police, standing as they do for a mythical “society,” are
primarily interested in catching and punishing the criminal; restoring
the stolen loot to the victim is strictly secondary. To the insurance
company and its detectives, on the other hand, the prime concern is
recovery of the loot, and apprehension and punishment of the criminal is
secondary to the prime purpose of aiding the victim of crime. Here we
see again the difference between a private firm impelled to serve the
customer-victim of crime and the public police, which is under no such
economic compulsion.

We cannot blueprint a market that exists only as an hypothesis, but it
is reasonable to believe that police service in the libertarian society
would be supplied by the landowners or by insurance companies. Since
insurance companies would be paying benefits to victims of crime, it is
highly likely that they would supply police service as a means of
keeping down crime and hence their payment of benefits. It is certainly
likely in any case that police service would be paid for in regular
monthly premiums, with the police agency—whether insurance company or
not—called on whenever needed.

This supplies what should be the first simple answer to a typical
nightmare question of people who first hear about the idea of a totally
private police: “Why, that means that if you’re attacked or robbed you
have to rush over to a policeman and start dickering on how much it will
cost to defend you.” A moment’s reflection should show that no service
is supplied in this way on the free market. Obviously, the person who
wants to be protected by Agency A or Insurance Company B will pay
regular premiums rather than wait to be attacked before buying
protection. “But suppose an emergency occurs and a Company A policeman
sees someone being mugged; will he stop to ask if the victim has bought
insurance from Company A?” In the first place, this sort of street crime
will be taken care of, as we noted above, by the police hired by whoever
owns the street in question. But what of the unlikely case that a
neighborhood does not have street police, and a policeman of Company A
happens to see someone being attacked? Will he rush to the victim’s
defense? That, of course, would be up to Company A, but it is scarcely
conceivable that private police companies would not cultivate goodwill
by making it a policy to give free aid to victims in emergency
situations and perhaps ask the rescued victim for a voluntary donation
afterward. In the case of a homeowner being robbed or attacked, then of
course he will call on whichever police company he has been using. He
will call Police Company A rather than “the police” he calls upon now.

Competition insures efficiency, low price, and high quality, and there
is no reason to assume *a priori*, as many people do, that there is
something divinely ordained about having only *one* police agency in a
given geographical area. Economists have often claimed that the
production of certain goods or services is a “natural monopoly,” so that
more than one private agency could not long survive in a given area.
Perhaps, although only a totally free market could decide the matter
once and for all. Only the market can decide what and how many firms,
and of what size and quality, can survive in active competition. But
there is no reason to suppose in advance that police protection is a
“natural monopoly.” After all, insurance companies are not; and if we
can have Metropolitan, Equitable, Prudential, etc., insurance companies
coexisting side by side, why not Metropolitan, Equitable, and Prudential
police protection companies? Gustave de Molinari, the nineteenth-century
French free-market economist, was the first person in history to
contemplate and advocate a free market for police
protection.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn2)^ Molinari estimated that
there would eventually turn out to be several private police agencies
side by side in the cities, and one private agency in each rural area.
Perhaps—but we must realize that modern technology makes much more
feasible branch offices of large urban firms in even the most remote
rural areas. A person living in a small village in Wyoming, therefore,
could employ the services of a local protection company, or he might use
a nearby branch office of the Metropolitan Protection Company.

“But how could a poor person afford private protection he would have to
pay for instead of getting free protection, as he does now?” There are
several answers to this question, one of the most common criticisms of
the idea of totally private police protection. One is: that this problem
of course applies to *any* commodity or service in the libertarian
society, not just the police. But isn’t protection necessary? Perhaps,
but then so is food of many different kinds, clothing, shelter, etc.
Surely these are at least as vital if not more so than police
protection, and yet almost nobody says that *therefore* the government
must nationalize food, clothing, shelter, etc., and supply these free as
a compulsory monopoly. Very poor people would be supplied, in general,
by private charity, as we saw in our chapter on welfare. Furthermore, in
the specific case of police there would undoubtedly be ways of
voluntarily supplying free police protection to the indigent—either by
the police companies themselves for goodwill (as hospitals and doctors
do now) or by special “police aid” societies that would do work similar
to “legal aid” societies today. (Legal aid societies voluntarily supply
free legal counsel to the indigent in trouble with the authorities.)

There are important supplementary considerations. As we have seen,
police service is *not* “free”; it is paid for by the taxpayer, and the
taxpayer is very often the poor person himself. He may very well be
paying more in taxes for police now than he would in fees to private,
and far more efficient, police companies. Furthermore, the police
companies would be tapping a mass market; with the economies of such a
large-scale market, police protection would undoubtedly be much cheaper.
No police company would wish to price itself out of a large chunk of its
market, and the cost of protection would be no more prohibitively
expensive than, say, the cost of insurance today. (In fact, it would
tend to be much cheaper than current insurance, because the insurance
industry today is heavily regulated by government to keep out low-cost
competition.)

There is a final nightmare which most people who have contemplated
private protection agencies consider to be decisive in rejecting such a
concept. Wouldn’t the agencies always be clashing? Wouldn’t “anarchy”
break out, with perpetual conflicts between police forces as one person
calls in “his” police while a rival calls in “his”?

There are several levels of answers to this crucial question. In the
first place, since there would be no overall State, no central or even
single local government, we would *at least* be spared the horror of
inter-State wars, with their plethora of massive, superdestructive, and
now nuclear, weapons. As we look back through history, isn’t it
painfully clear that the number of people killed in isolated
neighborhood “rumbles” or conflicts is as nothing to the total mass
devastation of interstate wars? There are good reasons for this. To
avoid emotionalism let us take two hypothetical countries: “Ruritania”
and “Walldavia.” If both Ruritania and Walldavia were dissolved into a
libertarian society, with no government and innumerable private
individuals, firms, and police agencies, the only clashes that *could*
break out would be local, and the weaponry would necessarily be strictly
limited in scope and devastation. Suppose that in a Ruritanian city two
police agencies clash and start shooting it out. At worst, they could
*not* use mass bombing or nuclear destruction or germ warfare, since
they themselves would be blown up in the holocaust. It is the slicing
off of territorial areas into single, governmental monopolies that leads
to mass destruction—for *then* if the single monopoly government of
Walldavia confronts its ancient rival, the government of Ruritania, each
can wield weapons of mass destruction and even nuclear warfare because
it will be the “other guy” and the “other country” they will hurt.
Furthermore, now that every person is a subject of a monopoly
government, in the eyes of every other government he becomes
irretrievably *identified* with “his” government. The citizen of France
is identified with “his” government, and therefore if another government
attacks France, it will attack the citizenry as well as the government
of France. But if Company A battles with Company B, the *most* that can
happen is that the respective customers of each company may be dragged
into the battle—but *no one else.* It should be evident, then, that
*even* if the worst happened, and a libertarian world would indeed
become a world of “anarchy,” we would *still* be much better off than we
are now, at the mercy of rampant, “anarchic” nation-states, each
possessing a fearsome monopoly of weapons of mass destruction. We must
never forget that we are all living, and always have lived, in a world
of “international anarchy,” in a world of coercive nation-states
unchecked by any overall world government, and there is no prospect of
this situation changing.

A libertarian world, then, even if anarchic, would still not suffer the
brutal wars, the mass devastation, the A-bombing, that our State-ridden
world has suffered for centuries. Even if local police clash
continually, there would be no more Dresdens, no more Hiroshimas.

But there is far more to be said. We should never concede that this
local “anarchy” would be likely to occur. Let us separate the problem of
police clashes into distinct and different parts: honest disagreements,
and the attempt of one or more police forces to become “outlaws” and to
extract funds or impose their rule by coercion. Let us assume for a
moment that the police forces will be honest, and that they are only
driven by honest clashes of opinion; we will set aside for a while the
problem of outlaw police. Surely one of the very important aspects of
protection service the police can offer their respective customers is
quiet protection. Every consumer, every buyer of police protection,
would wish above all for protection that is efficient and quiet, with no
conflicts or disturbances. Every police agency would be fully aware of
this vital fact. To assume that police would continually clash and
battle with each other is absurd, for it ignores the devastating effect
that this chaotic “anarchy” would have on the business of all the police
companies. To put it bluntly, such wars and conflicts would be bad—very
bad—for business. Therefore, on the free market, the police agencies
would all see to it that there would be no clashes between them, and
that all conflicts of opinion would be ironed out in private courts,
decided by private judges or arbitrators.

To get more specific: in the first place, as we have said, clashes would
be minimal because the street owner would have his guards, the
storekeeper his, the landlord his, and the homeowner his own police
company. Realistically, in the everyday world there would be little room
for direct clashes between police agencies. But suppose, as will
sometimes occur two neighboring homeowners get into a fight, each
accuses the other of initiating assault or violence, and each calls on
his own police company, should they happen to subscribe to different
companies. What then? Again, it would be pointless and economically as
well as physically self-destructive for the two police companies to
start shooting it out. Instead, every police company, to remain in
business at all, would announce as a *vital part* of its service, the
use of private courts or arbitrators to decide who is in the wrong.

## THE COURTS [the-courts-1]

Suppose, then, that the judge or arbitrator decides Smith was in the
wrong in a dispute, and that he aggressed against Jones. If Smith
accepts the verdict, then, whatever damages or punishment is levied,
there is no problem for the theory of libertarian protection. But what
if he does not accept it? Or suppose another example: Jones is robbed.
He sets his police company to do detective work in trying to track down
the criminal. The company decides that a certain Brown is the criminal.
Then what? If Brown acknowledges his guilt, then again there is no
problem and judicial punishment proceeds, centering on forcing the
criminal to make restitution to the victim. But, again, what if Brown
denies his guilt?

These cases take us out of the realm of police protection and into
another vital area of protection: *judicial* service, i.e., the
provision, in accordance with generally accepted procedures, of a method
of trying as best as one can to determine *who* is the criminal, or
*who* is the breaker of contracts, in any sort of crime or dispute. Many
people, even those who acknowledge that there could be privately
competitive police service supplied on a free market, balk at the idea
of totally private courts. How in the world could *courts* be private?
How would courts employ force in a world without government? Wouldn’t
eternal conflicts and “anarchy” *then* ensue?

In the first place, the monopoly courts of government are subject to the
same grievous problems, inefficiencies, and contempt for the consumer as
any other government operation. We all know that judges, for example,
are *not* selected according to their wisdom, probity, or efficiency in
serving the consumer, but are political hacks chosen by the political
process. Furthermore, the courts are monopolies; if, for example, the
courts in some town or city should become corrupt, venal, oppressive, or
inefficient, the citizen at present has no recourse. The aggrieved
citizen of Deep Falls, Wyoming, must be governed by the local Wyoming
court or not at all. In a libertarian society, there would be many
courts, many judges to whom he could turn. Again, there is no reason to
assume a “natural monopoly” of judicial wisdom. The Deep Falls citizen
could, for example, call upon the local branch of the Prudential
Judicial Company.

How would courts be financed in a free society? There are many
possibilities. Possibly, each individual would subscribe to a court
service, paying a monthly premium, and then calling upon the court if he
is in need. Or, since courts will probably be needed much less
frequently than policemen, he may pay a fee whenever he chooses to use
the court, with the criminal or contract-breaker eventually recompensing
the victim or plaintiff. Or, in still a third possibility, the courts
may be hired by the police agencies to settle disputes, *or* there may
even be “vertically integrated” firms supplying *both* police and
judicial service: the Prudential Judicial Company might have a police
and a judicial division. Only the market will be able to decide which of
these methods will be most appropriate.

We should all be more familiar with the increasing use of private
arbitration, even in our present society. The government courts have
become so clogged, inefficient, and wasteful that more and more parties
to disputes are turning to private arbitrators as a cheaper and far less
time-consuming way of settling their disputes. In recent years, private
arbitration has become a growing and highly successful profession. Being
voluntary, furthermore, the rules of arbitration can be decided rapidly
by the parties themselves, without the need for a ponderous, complex
legal framework applicable to all citizens. Arbitration therefore
permits judgments to be made by people expert in the trade or occupation
concerned. Currently, the American Arbitration Association, whose motto
is “The Handclasp is Mightier than the Fist,” has 25 regional offices
throughout the country, with 23,000 arbitrators. In 1969, the
Association conducted over 22,000 arbitrations. In addition, the
insurance companies adjust over 50,000 claims a year through voluntary
arbitration. There is also a growing and successful use of private
arbitrators in automobile accident claim cases.

It might be protested that, while performing an ever greater proportion
of judicial functions, the private arbitrators’ decisions are still
enforced by the courts, so that once the disputing parties agree on an
arbitrator, his decision becomes legally binding. This is true, but it
was *not* the case before 1920, and the arbitration profession grew at
as rapid a rate from 1900 to 1920 as it has since. In fact, the modern
arbitration movement began in full force in England during the time of
the American Civil War, with merchants increasingly using the “private
courts” provided by voluntary arbitrators, even though the decisions
were not legally binding. By 1900, voluntary arbitration began to take
hold in the United States. In fact, in medieval England, the entire
structure of merchant law, which was handled clumsily and inefficiently
by the government’s courts, grew up in private merchants’ courts. The
merchants’ courts were purely voluntary arbitrators, and the decisions
were not legally binding. How, then, were they successful?

The answer is that the merchants, in the Middle Ages and down to 1920,
relied solely on ostracism and boycott by the other merchants in the
area. In other words, should a merchant refuse to submit to arbitration
or ignore a decision, the other merchants would publish this fact in the
trade, and would refuse to deal with the recalcitrant merchant, bringing
him quickly to heel. Wooldridge mentions one medieval example:

> Merchants made their courts work simply by agreeing to abide by the
> results. The merchant who broke the understanding would not be sent to
> jail, to be sure, but neither would he long continue to be a merchant,
> for the compliance exacted by his fellows, and their power over his
> goods, proved if anything more effective than physical coercion. Take
> John of Homing, who made his living marketing wholesale quantities of
> fish. When John sold a lot of herring on the representation that it
> conformed to a three-barrel sample, but which, his fellow merchants
> found, was actually mixed with “sticklebacks and putrid herring,” he
> made good the deficiency on pain of economic
> ostracism.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn3)^

In modern times, ostracism became even more effective, and it included
the knowledge that anyone who ignored an arbitrator’s award could never
again avail himself of an arbitrator’s services. Industrialist Owen D.
Young, head of General Electric, concluded that the moral censure of
other businessmen was a far more effective sanction than legal
enforcement. Nowadays, modern technology, computers, and credit ratings
would make such nationwide ostracism even more effective than it has
ever been in the past.

Even if purely voluntary arbitration is sufficient for commercial
disputes, however, what of frankly criminal activities: the mugger, the
rapist, the bank robber? In these cases, it must be admitted that
ostracism would probably not be sufficient—even though it would also
include, we must remember, refusal of private street owners to allow
such criminals in their areas. For the criminal cases, then, courts and
legal enforcement become necessary.

How, then, would the courts operate in the libertarian society? In
particular, how could they *enforce* their decisions? In all their
operations, furthermore, they must observe the critical libertarian rule
that no physical force may be used against anyone who has not been
convicted as a criminal—otherwise, the users of such force, whether
police or courts, would be themselves liable to be convicted as
aggressors if it turned out that the person they had used force against
was innocent of crime. In contrast to statist systems, no policeman or
judge could be granted special immunity to use coercion beyond what
anyone else in society could use.

Let us now take the case we mentioned before. Mr. Jones is robbed, his
hired detective agency decides that one Brown committed the crime, and
Brown refuses to concede his guilt. What then? In the first place, we
must recognize that there is at present no overall world court or world
government enforcing its decrees; yet while we live in a state of
“international anarchy” there is little or no problem in disputes
between private citizens of two countries. Suppose that right now, for
example, a citizen of Uruguay claims that he has been swindled by a
citizen of Argentina. Which court does he go to? He goes to his own,
i.e., the victim’s or the plaintiff’s court. The case proceeds in the
Uruguayan court, and its decision is honored by the Argentinian court.
The same is true if an American feels he has been swindled by a
Canadian, and so on. In Europe after the Roman Empire, when German
tribes lived side by side and in the same areas, if a Visigoth felt that
he had been injured by a Frank, he took the case to his own court, and
the decision was generally accepted by the Franks. Going to the
plaintiff’s court is the rational libertarian procedure as well, since
the victim or plaintiff is the one who is aggrieved, and who naturally
takes the case to his own court. So, in our case, Jones would go to the
Prudential Court Company to charge Brown with theft.

It is possible, of course, that Brown is also a client of the Prudential
Court, in which case there is no problem. The Prudential’s decision
covers both parties, and becomes binding. But one important stipulation
is that no coercive subpoena power can be used against Brown, because he
must be considered innocent until he is convicted. But Brown would be
served with a voluntary subpoena, a notice that he is being tried on
such and such a charge and inviting him or his legal representative to
appear. If he does not appear, then he will be tried *in absentia*, and
this will obviously be less favorable for Brown since his side of the
case will not be pleaded in court. If Brown is declared guilty, then the
court and its marshals will employ force to seize Brown and exact
whatever punishment is decided upon—a punishment which obviously will
focus first on restitution to the victim.

What, however, if Brown does not recognize the Prudential Court? What if
he is a client of the Metropolitan Court Company? Here the case becomes
more difficult. What will happen then? First, victim Jones pleads his
case in the Prudential Court. If Brown is found innocent, this ends the
controversy. Suppose, however, that defendant Brown is found guilty. If
he does nothing, the court’s judgment proceeds against him. Suppose,
however, Brown then takes the case to the Metropolitan Court Company,
pleading inefficiency or venality by Prudential. The case will then be
heard by Metropolitan. If Metropolitan also finds Brown guilty, this too
ends the controversy and Prudential will proceed against Brown with
dispatch. Suppose, however, that Metropolitan finds Brown innocent of
the charge. Then what? Will the two courts and their arms-wielding
marshals shoot it out in the streets?

Once again, this would clearly be irrational and self-destructive
behavior on the part of the courts. An essential part of their judicial
service to their clients is the provision of just, objective, and
peacefully functioning decisions—the best and most objective way of
arriving at the truth of who committed the crime. Arriving at a decision
and then allowing chaotic gunplay would scarcely be considered valuable
judicial service by their customers. Thus, an essential part of any
court’s service to its clients would be an appeals procedure. In short,
every court would agree to abide by an appeals trial, as decided by a
voluntary arbitrator to whom Metropolitan and Prudential would now turn.
The appeals judge would make his decision, and the result of this third
trial would be treated as binding on the guilty. The Prudential court
would then proceed to enforcement.

An appeals court! But isn’t this setting up a compulsory monopoly
government once again? No, because there is nothing in the system that
requires any one person or court to be the court of appeal. In short, in
the United States at present the Supreme Court is established as *the*
court of final appeal, so the Supreme Court judges become the final
arbiters regardless of the wishes of plaintiff or defendant alike. In
contrast, in the libertarian society the various competing private
courts could go to *any* appeals judge they think fair, expert, and
objective. No single appeals judge or set of judges would be foisted
upon society by coercion.

How would the appeals judges be financed? There are many possible ways,
but the most likely is that they will be paid by the various original
courts who would charge their customers for appeals services in their
premiums or fees.

But suppose Brown insists on another appeals judge, and yet another?
Couldn’t he escape judgment by appealing *ad infinitum*? Obviously, in
*any* society legal proceedings cannot continue indefinitely; there must
be *some* cutoff point. In the present statist society, where government
monopolizes the judicial function, the Supreme Court is arbitrarily
designated as the cutoff point. In the libertarian society, there would
also have to be an agreed-upon cutoff point, and since there are only
two parties to any crime or dispute—the plaintiff and the defendant—it
seems most sensible for the legal code to declare that *a decision
arrived at by any two courts* shall be binding. This will cover the
situation when both the plaintiff’s and the defendant’s courts come to
the same decision, as well as the situation when an appeals court
decides on a disagreement between the two original courts.

## THE LAW AND THE COURTS [19-chap12.html#page282]

It is now clear that there will have to be a legal code in the
libertarian society. How? How can there be a legal code, a system of law
*without* a government to promulgate it, an appointed system of judges,
or a legislature to vote on statutes? To begin with, is a legal code
consistent with libertarian principles?

To answer the last question first, it should be clear that a legal code
is necessary to lay down precise guidelines for the private courts. If,
for example, Court A decides that all redheads are inherently evil and
must be punished, it is clear that such decisions are the reverse of
libertarian, that such a law would constitute an invasion of the rights
of redheads. Hence, any such decision would be *illegal* in terms of
libertarian principle, and could not be upheld by the rest of society.
It then becomes necessary to have a legal code which would be generally
accepted, and which the courts would pledge themselves to follow. The
legal code, simply, would insist on the libertarian principle of no
aggression against person or property, define property rights in
accordance with libertarian principle, set up rules of evidence (such as
currently apply) in deciding who are the wrongdoers in any dispute, and
set up a code of maximum punishment for any particular crime. Within the
framework of such a code, the particular courts would compete on the
most efficient procedures, and the market would then decide whether
judges, juries, etc., are the most efficient methods of providing
judicial services.

Are such stable and consistent law codes possible, with only competing
judges to develop and apply them, and without government or legislature?
Not only are they *possible*, but over the years the best and most
successful parts of our legal system were developed precisely in this
manner. Legislatures, as well as kings, have been capricious, invasive,
and inconsistent. They have only introduced anomalies and despotism into
the legal system. In fact, the government is no more qualified to
develop and apply law than it is to provide any other service; and just
as religion has been separated from the State, and the economy can be
separated from the State, so can every other State function, including
police, courts, *and* the law itself!

As indicated above, for example, the entire law merchant was developed,
not by the State or in State courts, but by private merchant courts. It
was only much later that government took over mercantile law from its
development in merchants’ courts. The same occurred with admiralty law,
the entire structure of the law of the sea, shipping, salvages, etc.
Here again, the State was not interested, and its jurisdiction did not
apply to the high seas; so the shippers themselves took on the task of
not only applying, but working out the whole structure of admiralty law
in their own private courts. Again, it was only later that the
government appropriated admiralty law into its own courts.

Finally, the major body of Anglo-Saxon law, the justly celebrated
*common law*, was developed over the centuries by competing judges
applying time-honored principles rather than the shifting decrees of the
State. These principles were not decided upon arbitrarily by any king or
legislature; they grew up over centuries by applying rational—and very
often libertarian—principles to the cases before them. The idea of
following precedent was developed, *not* as a blind service to the past,
but because all the judges of the past had made their decisions in
applying the generally accepted common law principles to specific cases
and problems. For it was universally held that the judge did not *make*
law (as he often does today); the judge’s task, his expertise, was in
*finding* the law in accepted common law principles, and then applying
that law to specific cases or to new technological or institutional
conditions. The glory of the centuries-long development of the common
law is testimony to their success.

The common law judges, furthermore, functioned very much like private
arbitrators, as experts in the law to whom private parties went with
their disputes. There was no arbitrarily imposed “supreme court” whose
decision would be binding, nor was precedent, though honored, considered
as *automatically* binding either. Thus, the libertarian Italian jurist
Bruno Leoni has written:

> courts of judicature could not easily enact arbitrary rules of their
> own in England, as they were never in a position to do so directly,
> that is to say, in the usual, sudden, widely ranging and imperious
> manner of legislators. Moreover, there were so many courts of justice
> in England and they were so jealous of one another that even the
> famous principle of the binding precedent was not openly recognized as
> valid by them until comparatively recent times. Besides, they could
> never decide anything that had not been previously brought before them
> by private persons. Finally, comparatively few people used to go
> before the courts to ask from them the rules deciding their
> cases.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn4)^

And on the absence of “supreme courts”:

> it cannot be denied that the lawyers’ law or the judiciary law may
> tend to acquire the characteristics of legislation, including its
> undesirable ones, whenever jurists or judges are entitled to decide
> ultimately on a case. ... In our time the mechanism of the judiciary
> in certain countries where “supreme courts” are established results in
> the imposition of the personal views of the members of these courts,
> or of a majority of them, on all the other people concerned whenever
> there is a great deal of disagreement between the opinion of the
> former and the convictions of the latter. But... this possibility, far
> from being necessarily implied in the nature of lawyers’ law or of
> judiciary law, is rather a deviation from
> it.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn5)^

Apart from such aberrations, the imposed personal views of the judges
were kept to a minimum: (a) by the fact that judges could only make
decisions when private citizens brought cases to them; (b) each judge’s
decisions applied only to the particular case; and (c) because the
decisions of the common-law judges and lawyers always considered the
precedents of the centuries. Furthermore, as Leoni points out, in
contrast to legislatures or the executive, where dominant majorities or
pressure groups ride roughshod over minorities, judges, by their very
position, are constrained to hear and weigh the arguments of the two
contending parties in each dispute. “Parties are *equal* as regards the
judge, in the sense that they are free to produce arguments and
evidence. They do not constitute a group in which dissenting minorities
give way to triumphant majorities.” And Leoni points out the analogy
between this process and the free-market economy: “Of course, arguments
may be stronger or weaker, but the fact that every party can produce
them is comparable to the fact that everybody can individually compete
with everybody else in the market in order to buy and
sell.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn6)^

Professor Leoni found that, in the *private law* area, the ancient Roman
judges operated in the same way as the English common law courts:

> The Roman jurist was a sort of scientist; the objects of his research
> were the solutions to cases that citizens submitted to him for study,
> just as industrialists might today submit to a physicist or to an
> engineer a technical problem concerning their plants or their
> production. Hence, private Roman law was something to be described or
> to be discovered, not something to be enacted—a world of things that
> were there, forming part of the common heritage of all Roman citizens.
> Nobody enacted that law; nobody could change it by any exercise of his
> personal will. ... This is the long-run concept or, if you prefer, the
> Roman concept, of the certainty of the
> law.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn7)^

Finally, Professor Leoni was able to use his knowledge of the operations
of ancient and common law to answer the vital question: In a libertarian
society, “who will appoint the judges... to let them perform the task of
defining the law?” His answer is: the *people* themselves, people who
would go to the judges with the greatest reputation of expertise and
wisdom in knowing and applying the basic common legal principles of the
society:

> In fact, it is rather immaterial to establish in advance who will
> appoint the judges, for, in a sense, everybody could do so, as happens
> to a certain extent when people resort to private arbiters to settle
> their own quarrels. ... For the appointment of judges is not such a
> special problem as would be, for example, that of “appointing”
> physicists or doctors or other kinds of learned and experienced
> people. The emergence of good professional people in any society is
> only apparently due to official appointments, if any. It is, in fact,
> based on a widespread consent on the part of clients, colleagues, and
> the public at large—a consent without which no appointment is really
> effective. Of course, people can be wrong about the true value chosen
> as being worthy, but these difficulties in their choice are
> inescapable in any kind of choice.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn8)^

Of course, in the future libertarian society, the basic legal code would
not rely on blind custom, much of which could well be antilibertarian.
The code would have to be established on the basis of acknowledged
libertarian principle, of nonaggression against the person or property
of others; in short, on the basis of reason rather than on mere
tradition, however sound its general outlines. Since we have a body of
common law principles to draw on, however, the task of reason in
correcting and amending the common law would be far easier than trying
to construct a body of systematic legal principles *de novo* out of the
thin air.

The most remarkable historical example of a society of libertarian law
and courts, however, has been neglected by historians until very
recently. And this was also a society where not only the courts and the
law were largely libertarian, but where they operated within a purely
*state-less* and libertarian society. This was ancient Ireland—an
Ireland which persisted in this libertarian path for roughly a thousand
years until its brutal conquest by England in the seventeenth century.
And, in contrast to many similarly functioning primitive tribes (such as
the Ibos in West Africa, and many European tribes), preconquest Ireland
was not in any sense a “primitive” society: it was a highly complex
society that was, for centuries, the most advanced, most scholarly, and
most civilized in all of Western Europe.

For a thousand years, then, ancient Celtic Ireland had no State or
anything like it. As the leading authority on ancient Irish law has
written: “There was no legislature, no bailiffs, no police, no public
enforcement of justice. ... There was no trace of State-administered
justice.”^[9](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn9)^

How then was justice secured? The basic political unit of ancient
Ireland was the *tuath*. All “freemen” who owned land, all
professionals, and all craftsmen, were entitled to become members of a
*tuath*. Each *tuath’s* members formed an annual assembly which decided
all common policies, declared war or peace on other *tuatha*, and
elected or deposed their “kings.” An important point is that, in
contrast to primitive tribes, no one was stuck or bound to a given
*tuath*, either because of kinship or of geographical location.
Individual members were free to, and often did, secede from a *tuath*
and join a competing *tuath*. Often, two or more *tuatha* decided to
merge into a single, more efficient unit. As Professor Peden states,
“the *tuath* is thus a body of persons voluntarily united for socially
beneficial purposes and the sum total of the landed properties of its
members constituted its territorial
dimension.”^[10](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn10)^ In short, they did not
have the modern State with its claim to sovereignty over a given
(usually expanding) territorial area, divorced from the landed property
rights of its subjects; on the contrary, *tuatha* were voluntary
associations which only comprised the landed properties of its voluntary
members. Historically, about 80 to 100 *tuatha* coexisted at any time
throughout Ireland.

But what of the elected “king”? Did *he* constitute a form of State
ruler? Chiefly, the king functioned as a religious high priest,
presiding over the worship rites of the *tuath*, which functioned as a
voluntary religious, as well as a social and political, organization. As
in pagan, pre-Christian, priesthoods, the kingly function was
hereditary, this practice carrying over to Christian times. The king was
elected by the *tuath* from within a royal kin-group (the *derbfine*),
which carried the hereditary priestly function. *Politically*, however,
the king had strictly limited functions: he was the military leader of
the *tuath*, and he presided over the *tuath* assemblies. But he could
only conduct war or peace negotiations as agent of the assemblies; and
he was in no sense sovereign and had no rights of administering justice
over *tuath* members. He could not legislate, and when he himself was
party to a lawsuit, he had to submit his case to an independent judicial
arbiter.

Again, how, then, was law developed and justice maintained? In the first
place, the law itself was based on a body of ancient and immemorial
custom, passed down as oral and then written tradition through a class
of professional jurists called the *brehons*. The brehons were in no
sense public, or governmental, officials; they were simply selected by
parties to disputes on the basis of their reputations for wisdom,
knowledge of the customary law, and the integrity of their decisions. As
Professor Peden states:

> the professional jurists were consulted by parties to disputes for
> advice as to what the law was in particular cases, and these same men
> often acted as arbitrators between suitors. They remained at all times
> private persons, not public officials; their functioning depended upon
> their knowledge of the law and the integrity of their judicial
> reputations.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn11)^

Furthermore, the brehons had *no connection whatsoever* with the
individual *tuatha* or with their kings. They were completely private,
national in scope, and were used by disputants throughout Ireland.
Moreover, and this is a vital point, in contrast to the system of
private Roman lawyers, the brehon was all there was; there were no other
judges, no “public” judges of any kind, in ancient Ireland.

It was the brehons who were schooled in the law, and who added glosses
and applications to the law to fit changing conditions. Furthermore,
there was no monopoly, in any sense, of the brehon jurists; instead,
several competing schools of jurisprudence existed and competed for the
custom of the Irish people.

How were the decisions of the brehons enforced? Through an elaborate,
voluntarily developed system of “insurance,” or sureties. Men were
linked together by a variety of surety relationships by which they
guaranteed one another for the righting of wrongs, and for the
enforcement of justice and the decisions of the brehons. In short, the
brehons themselves were not involved in the enforcement of decisions,
which rested again with private individuals linked through sureties.
There were various types of surety. For example, the surety would
guarantee with his own property the payment of a debt, and then join the
plaintiff in enforcing a debt judgment if the debtor refused to pay. In
that case, the debtor would have to pay double damages: one to the
original creditor, and another as compensation to his surety. And this
system applied to all offences, aggressions and assaults as well as
commercial contracts; in short, it applied to all cases of what we would
call “civil” and “criminal” law. All criminals were considered to be
“debtors” who owed restitution and compensation to their victims, who
thus became their “creditors.” The victim would gather his sureties
around him and proceed to apprehend the criminal or to proclaim his suit
publicly and demand that the defendant submit to adjudication of their
dispute with the brehons. The criminal might then send his own sureties
to negotiate a settlement or agree to submit the dispute to the brehons.
If he did not do so, he was considered an “outlaw” by the entire
community; he could no longer enforce any claim of his own in the
courts, and he was treated to the opprobrium of the entire
community.^[12](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn12)^

There were occasional “wars,” to be sure, in the thousand years of
Celtic Ireland, but they were minor brawls, negligible compared to the
devastating wars that racked the rest of Europe. As Professor Peden
points out,

> without the coercive apparatus of the State which can through taxation
> and conscription mobilize large amounts of arms and manpower, the
> Irish were unable to sustain any large scale military force in the
> field for any length of time. Irish wars... were pitiful brawls and
> cattle raids by European standards.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn13)^

Thus, we have indicated that it is perfectly possible, in theory and
historically, to have efficient and courteous police, competent and
learned judges, and a body of systematic and socially accepted law—and
none of these things being furnished by a coercive government.
Government—claiming a compulsory monopoly of protection over a
geographical area, and extracting its revenues by force—can be separated
from the entire field of protection. Government is no more necessary for
providing vital protection service than it is necessary for providing
anything else. And we have not stressed a crucial fact about government:
that its compulsory monopoly over the weapons of coercion has led it,
over the centuries, to infinitely more butcheries and infinitely greater
tyranny and oppression than any decentralized, private agencies could
possibly have done. If we look at the black record of mass murder,
exploitation, and tyranny levied on society by governments over the
ages, we need not be loath to abandon the Leviathan State and... try
freedom.

## OUTLAW PROTECTORS [19-chap12.html#page291]

We have saved for the last this problem: What if police or judges and
courts should be venal and biased—what if they should bias their
decisions, for example, in favor of particularly wealthy clients? We
have shown how a libertarian legal and judicial system could work on the
purely free market, assuming honest differences of opinion—but what if
one or more police or courts should become, in effect, outlaws? What
then?

In the first place, libertarians do not flinch from such a question. In
contrast to such utopians as Marxists or left-wing anarchists
(anarchocommunists or anarcho-syndicalists), libertarians do not assume
that the ushering in of the purely free society of their dreams will
also bring with it a new, magically transformed Libertarian Man. We do
not assume that the lion will lie down with the lamb, or that no one
will have criminal or fraudulent designs upon his neighbor. The “better”
that people will be, of course, the better *any* social system will
work, in particular the less work *any* police or courts will have to
do. But no such assumption is made by libertarians. What we assert is
that, given any particular degree of “goodness” or “badness” among men,
the purely libertarian society will be at once the most moral and the
most efficient, the least criminal and the most secure of person or
property.

Let us first consider the problem of the venal or crooked judge or
court. What of the court which favors its own wealthy client in trouble?
In the first place, any such favoritism will be highly unlikely, given
the rewards and sanctions of the free market economy. The very life of
the court, the very livelihood of a judge, will depend on his reputation
for integrity, fair-mindedness, objectivity, and the quest for truth in
every case. This is his “brand name.” Should word of any venality leak
out, he will immediately lose clients and the courts will no longer have
customers; for even those clients who may be criminally inclined will
scarcely sponsor a court whose decisions are no longer taken seriously
by the rest of society, or who themselves may well be in jail for
dishonest and fraudulent dealings. If, for example, Joe Zilch is accused
of a crime or breach of contract, and he goes to a “court” headed by his
brother-in-law, no one, least of all other, honest courts will take this
“court’s” decision seriously. It will no longer be considered a “court”
in the eyes of anyone but Joe Zilch and his family.

Contrast this built-in corrective mechanism to the present-day
government courts. Judges are appointed or elected for long terms, up to
life, and they are accorded a monopoly of decision-making in their
particular area. It is almost impossible, except in cases of gross
corruption, to do anything about venal decisions of judges. Their power
to make and to enforce their decisions continues unchecked year after
year. Their salaries continue to be paid, furnished under coercion by
the hapless taxpayer. But in the totally free society, any suspicion of
a judge or court will cause their customers to melt away and their
“decisions” to be ignored. This is a far more efficient system of
keeping judges honest than the mechanism of government.

Furthermore, the temptation for venality and bias would be far less for
another reason: business firms in the free market earn their keep, *not*
from wealthy customers, but from a mass market by consumers. Macy’s
earns its income from the mass of the population, not from a few wealthy
customers. The same is true of Metropolitan Life Insurance today, and
the same would be true of any “Metropolitan” court system tomorrow. It
would be folly indeed for the courts to risk the loss of favor by the
bulk of its customers for the favors of a few wealthy clients. But
contrast the present system, where judges, like all other politicians,
may be beholden to wealthy contributors who finance the campaigns of
their political parties.

There is a myth that the “American System” provides a superb set of
“checks and balances,” with the executive, the legislature, and the
courts all balancing and checking one against the other, so that power
cannot unduly accumulate in one set of hands. But the American “checks
and balances” system is largely a fraud. For each one of these
institutions is a coercive monopoly in its area, and all of them are
part of one government, headed by one political party at any given time.
Furthermore, at best there are only two parties, each one close to the
other in ideology and personnel, often colluding, and the actual
day-to-day business of government headed by a civil service bureaucracy
that *cannot* be displaced by the voters. Contrast to these mythical
checks and balances the *real* checks and balances provided by the
free-market economy! What keeps A&P honest is the competition, actual
and potential, of Safeway, Pioneer, and countless other grocery stores.
What keeps them honest is the ability of the consumers to cut off their
patronage. What would keep the free-market judges and courts honest is
the lively possibility of heading down the block or down the road to
*another* judge or court if suspicion should descend on any particular
one. What would keep them honest is the lively possibility of their
customers cutting off their business. These are the *real*, active
checks and balances of the free-market economy and the free society.

The same analysis applies to the possibility of a private police force
becoming outlaw, of using their coercive powers to exact tribute, set up
a “protection racket” to shake down their victims, etc. Of course, such
a thing *could* happen. But, in contrast to present-day society, there
would be immediate checks and balances available; there would be *other*
police forces who could use their weapons to band together to put down
the aggressors against their clientele. If the Metropolitan Police Force
should become gangsters and exact tribute, then the rest of society
could flock to the Prudential, Equitable, etc., police forces who could
band together to put them down. And this contrasts vividly with the
State. If a group of gangsters should capture the State apparatus, with
its monopoly of coercive weapons, there is nothing at present that can
stop them—short of the immensely difficult process of revolution. In a
libertarian society there would be no need for a massive revolution to
stop the depredation of gangster-States; there would be a swift turning
to the honest police forces to check and put down the force that had
turned bandit.

And, indeed, what is the State anyway but organized banditry? What is
taxation but theft on a gigantic, unchecked, scale? What is war but mass
murder on a scale impossible by private police forces? What is
conscription but mass enslavement? Can anyone envision a private police
force getting away with a tiny fraction of what States get away with,
and do habitually, year after year, century after century?

There is another vital consideration that would make it almost
impossible for an outlaw police force to commit anything like the
banditry that modern governments practice. One of the crucial factors
that permits governments to do the monstrous things they habitually do
is the sense of *legitimacy* on the part of the stupefied public. The
average citizen may not like—may even strongly object to—the policies
and exactions of his government. But he has been imbued with the
idea—carefully indoctrinated by centuries of governmental
propaganda—that the government is his legitimate sovereign, and that it
would be wicked or mad to refuse to obey its dictates. It is this sense
of legitimacy that the State’s intellectuals have fostered over the
ages, aided and abetted by all the trappings of legitimacy: flags,
rituals, ceremonies, awards, constitutions, etc. A bandit gang—*even if
all* the police forces conspired together into one vast gang—could never
command such legitimacy. The public would consider them purely bandits;
their extortions and tributes would never be considered legitimate
though onerous “taxes,” to be paid automatically. The public would
quickly resist these illegitimate demands and the bandits would be
resisted and overthrown. Once the public had tasted the joys,
prosperity, freedom, and efficiency of a libertarian, State-less
society, it would be almost impossible for a State to fasten itself upon
them once again. Once freedom has been fully enjoyed, it is no easy task
to force people to give it up.

But *suppose*—just suppose—that despite all these handicaps and
obstacles, despite the love for their new-found freedom, despite the
inherent checks and balances of the free market, suppose *anyway* that
the State manages to reestablish itself. What then? Well, then, all that
would have happened is that we would have a State once again. We would
be no worse off than we are now, with our current State. *And*, as one
libertarian philosopher has put it, “at least the world will have had a
glorious holiday.” Karl Marx’s ringing promise applies far more to a
libertarian society than to communism: In trying freedom, in abolishing
the State, we have nothing to lose and everything to gain.

## NATIONAL DEFENSE [national-defense]

We come now to what is usually the final argument against the
libertarian position. Every libertarian has heard a sympathetic but
critical listener say: “All right, I see how this system could be
applied successfully to local police and courts. But how could a
libertarian society defend us against the Russians?”

There are, of course, several dubious assumptions implied in such a
question. There is the assumption that the Russians are bent upon
military invasion of the United States, a doubtful assumption at best.
There is the assumption that any such desire would still remain after
the United States had become a purely libertarian society. This notion
overlooks the lesson of history that wars result from conflicts between
nation-states, each armed to the teeth, each direly suspicious of attack
by the other. But a libertarian America would clearly not be a threat to
anyone, not because it had no arms but because it would be dedicated to
no aggression against anyone, or against any country. Being no longer a
nation-state, which is inherently threatening, there would be little
chance of any country attacking us. One of the great evils of the
nation-state is that each State is able to identify all of its subjects
with itself; hence in any inter-State war, the innocent civilians, the
subjects of each country, are subject to aggression from the enemy
State. But in a libertarian society there would be no such
identification, and hence very little chance of such a devastating war.
Suppose, for example, that our outlaw Metropolitan Police Force has
initiated aggression not only against Americans but also against
Mexicans. If Mexico had a government, then clearly the Mexican
government would know full well that Americans in general were not
implicated in the Metropolitan’s crimes, and had no symbiotic
relationship with it. If the Mexican police engaged in a punitive
expedition to punish the Metropolitan force, they would not be at war
with Americans in general—as they would be now. In fact, it is highly
likely that other American forces would join the Mexicans in putting
down the aggressor. Hence, the idea of inter-State war against a
libertarian country or geographical area would most likely disappear.

There is, furthermore, a grave philosophical error in the very posing of
this sort of question about the Russians. When we contemplate *any* sort
of new system, whatever it may be, we must *first* decide whether we
want to see it brought about. In order to decide whether we *want*
libertarianism or communism, or left-wing anarchism, or theocracy, or
any other system, we must first assume that it has been established, and
*then* consider whether the system could work, whether it could remain
in existence, and just how efficient such a system would be. We have
shown, I believe, that a libertarian system, once instituted, could
work, be viable, and be at once far more efficient, prosperous, moral,
and free than any other social system. But we have said nothing about
how to *get* from the present system to the ideal; for these are two
totally separate questions: the question of what *is* our ideal goal,
and of the strategy and tactics of how to get from the present system
*to* that goal. The Russian question mixes these two levels of
discourse. It assumes, *not* that libertarianism has been established
everywhere throughout the globe, but that for some reason it has been
established *only* in America and nowhere else. But why assume this? Why
not first assume that it has been established *everywhere* and see
whether we like it? After all, the libertarian philosophy is an eternal
one, not bound to time or place. We advocate liberty for everyone,
everywhere, not just in the United States. If someone agrees that a
world libertarian society, once established, is the best that he can
conceive, that it would be workable, efficient, and moral, then let him
*become* a libertarian, let him join us in accepting liberty as our
ideal goal, and *then* join us further in the separate—and obviously
difficult—task of figuring out how to bring this ideal about.

If we do move on to strategy, it is obvious that the larger an area in
which liberty is first established the *better* its chances for
survival, and the better its chance to resist any violent overthrow that
may be attempted. If liberty is established instantaneously throughout
the world, then there will of course be *no* problem of “national
defense.” *All* problems will be local police problems. If, however,
only Deep Falls, Wyoming, becomes libertarian while the rest of America
and the world remain statist, its chances for survival will be very
slim. If Deep Falls, Wyoming, declares its secession from the United
States government and establishes a free society, the chances are great
that the United States—given its historical ferocity toward
secessionists—would quickly invade and crush the new free society, and
there is little that *any* Deep Falls police force could do about it.
Between these two polar cases, there is an infinite continuum of
degrees, and obviously, the larger the area of freedom, the better it
could withstand any outside threat. The “Russian question” is therefore
a matter of strategy rather than a matter of deciding on basic
principles and on the goal toward which we wish to direct our efforts.

But after all this is said and done, let us take up the Russian question
anyway. Let us assume that the Soviet Union would really be hell-bent on
attacking a libertarian population within the present boundaries of the
United States (clearly, there would no longer be a United States
government to form a single nation-state). In the first place, the form
and quantity of defense expenditures would be decided upon by the
American consumers themselves. Those Americans who favor Polaris
submarines, and fear a Soviet threat, would subscribe toward the
financing of such vessels. Those who prefer an ABM system would invest
in such defensive missiles. Those who laugh at such a threat or those
who are committed pacifists would not contribute to any “national”
defense service at all. Different defense theories would be applied in
proportion to those who agree with, and support, the various theories
being offered. Given the enormous waste in all wars and defense
preparations in all countries throughout history, it is certainly not
beyond the bounds of reason to propose that private, voluntary defense
efforts would be far more efficient than government boondoggles.
Certainly these efforts would be infinitely more moral.

But let us assume the worst. Let us assume that the Soviet Union at last
invades and conquers the territory of America. What then? We have to
realize that the Soviet Union’s difficulties will have only just begun.
The main reason a conquering country can rule a defeated country is that
the latter has an existing State apparatus to transmit and enforce the
victor’s orders onto a subject population. Britain, though far smaller
in area and population, was able to rule India for centuries because it
could transmit British orders to the ruling Indian princes, who in turn
could enforce them on the subject population. But in those cases in
history where the conquered *had* no government, the conquerors found
rule over the conquered extremely difficult. When the British conquered
West Africa, for example, they found it extremely difficult to govern
the Ibo tribe (later to form Biafra) because that tribe was essentially
libertarian, and had no ruling government of tribal chiefs to transmit
orders to the natives. And perhaps the major reason it took the English
centuries to conquer ancient Ireland is that the Irish had no State, and
that there was therefore no ruling governmental structure to keep
treaties, transmit orders, etc. It is for this reason that the English
kept denouncing the “wild” and “uncivilized” Irish as “faithless,”
because they would not keep treaties with the English conquerors. The
English could never understand that, lacking any sort of State, the
Irish warriors who concluded treaties with the English could *only*
speak for themselves; they could never commit any other group of the
Irish population.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap12_fn14)^

Furthermore, the occupying Russians’ lives would be made even more
difficult by the inevitable eruption of guerrilla warfare by the
American population. It is surely a lesson of the twentieth century—a
lesson first driven home by the successful American revolutionaries
against the mighty British Empire—that no occupying force can long keep
down a native population determined to resist. If the giant United
States, armed with far greater productivity and firepower, could not
succeed against a tiny and relatively unarmed Vietnamese population, how
in the world could the Soviet Union succeed in keeping down the American
people? No Russian occupation soldier’s life would be safe from the
wrath of a resisting American populace. Guerrilla warfare has proved to
be an irresistible force precisely because it stems, not from a
dictatorial central government, but from the people themselves, fighting
for their liberty and independence against a foreign State. And surely
the anticipation of this sea of troubles, of the enormous costs and
losses that would inevitably follow, would stop well in advance even a
hypothetical Soviet government bent on military conquest.

