# 10 THE PUBLIC SECTOR, I: GOVERNMENT IN BUSINESS [17-chap10.html#page241]

People tend to fall into habits and into unquestioned ruts, especially
in the field of government. On the market, in society in general, we
expect and accommodate rapidly to change, to the unending marvels and
improvements of our civilization. New products, new life styles, new
ideas are often embraced eagerly. But in the area of government we
follow blindly in the path of centuries, content to believe that
whatever has been must be right. In particular, government, in the
United States and elsewhere, for centuries and seemingly from time
immemorial has been supplying us with certain essential and necessary
services, services which nearly everyone concedes are important: defense
(including army, police, judicial, and legal), firefighting, streets and
roads, water, sewage and garbage disposal, postal service, etc. So
identified has the State become in the public mind with the provision of
these services that an attack on State financing *appears* to many
people as an attack on the service itself. Thus if one maintains that
the State should not supply court services, and that private enterprise
on the market could supply such service more efficiently as well as more
morally, people tend to think of this as denying the importance of
courts themselves.

The libertarian who wants to replace government by private enterprises
in the above areas is thus treated in the same way as he would be if the
government had, for various reasons, been supplying shoes as a
tax-financed monopoly from time immemorial. If the government and only
the government had had a monopoly of the shoe manufacturing and
retailing business, how would most of the public treat the libertarian
who now came along to advocate that the government get out of the shoe
business and throw it open to private enterprise? He would undoubtedly
be treated as follows: people would cry, “How could you? You are opposed
to the public, and to poor people, wearing shoes! And *who* would supply
shoes to the public if the government got out of the business? Tell us
that! Be constructive! It’s easy to be negative and smart-alecky about
government; but tell us *who* would supply shoes? Which people? How many
shoe stores would be available in each city and town? How would the shoe
firms be capitalized? How many brands would there be? What material
would they use? What lasts? What would be the pricing arrangements for
shoes? Wouldn’t regulation of the shoe industry be needed to see to it
that the product is sound? And who would supply the poor with shoes?
Suppose a poor person didn’t have the money to buy a pair?”

These questions, ridiculous as they seem to be and are with regard to
the shoe business, are just as absurd when applied to the libertarian
who advocates a free market in fire, police, postal service, or any
other government operation. The point is that the advocate of a free
market in *anything* cannot provide a “constructive” blueprint of such a
market in advance. The essence and the glory of the free market is that
individual firms and businesses, competing on the market, provide an
ever-changing orchestration of efficient and progressive goods and
services: continually improving products and markets, advancing
technology, cutting costs, and meeting changing consumer demands as
swiftly and as efficiently as possible. The libertarian economist can
try to offer a few guidelines on how markets *might* develop where they
are now prevented or restricted from developing; but he can do little
more than point the way toward freedom, to call for government to get
out of the way of the productive and ever-inventive energies of the
public as expressed in voluntary market activity. No one can predict the
number of firms, the size of each firm, the pricing policies, etc., of
any future market in any service or commodity. We just know—by economic
theory and by historical insight—that such a free market will do the job
infinitely better than the compulsory monopoly of bureaucratic
government.

How will the poor pay for defense, fire protection, postal service,
etc., can basically be answered by the counter-question: how do the poor
pay for *anything* they now obtain on the market? The difference is that
we know that the free private market will supply these goods and
services far more cheaply, in greater abundance, and of far higher
quality than monopoly government does today. Everyone in society would
benefit, and *especially* the poor. And we also know that the mammoth
tax burden to finance these and other activities would be lifted from
the shoulders of everyone in society, including the poor.

We have seen above that the universally acknowledged pressing problems
of our society are all wrapped up in government operations. We have also
seen that the enormous social conflicts entwined in the public school
system would all disappear when each group of parents was allowed to
finance and support whichever education it preferred for their children.
The grave inefficiencies and the intense conflicts are all inherent in
government operation. If the government, for example, provides monopoly
services (e.g., in education or in water supply), then whichever
decisions the government makes are coercively imposed on the hapless
minority—whether it is a question of educational policies for the
schools (integration or segregation, progressive or traditional,
religious or secular, etc.), or even for the kind of water to be sold
(e.g., fluoridated or unfluoridated). It should be clear that no such
fierce arguments occur where each group of consumers can purchase the
goods or services they demand. There are no battles between consumers,
for example, over what kind of newspapers should be printed, churches
established, books printed, records marketed, or automobiles
manufactured. Whatever is produced on the market reflects the diversity
as well as the strength of consumer demand.

On the free market, in short, the consumer is king, and any business
firm that wants to make profits and avoid losses tries its best to serve
the consumer as efficiently and at as low a cost as possible. In a
government operation, in contrast, everything changes. *Inherent in all
government operation is a grave and fatal split between service and
payment*, between the providing of a service and the payment for
receiving it. The government bureau does not get its income as does the
private firm, from serving the consumer well or from consumer purchases
of its products exceeding its costs of operation. No, the government
bureau acquires its income from mulcting the long-suffering taxpayer.
Its operations therefore become inefficient, and costs zoom, since
government bureaus need not worry about losses or bankruptcy; they can
make up their losses by additional extractions from the public till.
Furthermore, the consumer, instead of being courted and wooed for his
favor, becomes a mere annoyance to the government, someone who is
“wasting” the *government’s* scarce resources. In government operations,
the consumer is treated like an unwelcome intruder, an interference in
the quiet enjoyment by the bureaucrat of his steady income.

Thus, if consumer demand should increase for the goods or services of
any private business, the private firm is delighted; it woos and
welcomes the new business and expands its operations eagerly to fill the
new orders. Government, in contrast, generally meets this situation by
sourly urging or even ordering consumers to “buy” less, and allows
shortages to develop, along with deterioration in the quality of its
service. Thus, the increased consumer use of government streets in the
cities is met by aggravated traffic congestion and by continuing
denunciations and threats against people who drive their own cars. The
New York City administration, for example, is continually threatening to
outlaw the use of private cars in Manhattan, where congestion has been
most troublesome. It is only government, of course, that would ever
think of bludgeoning consumers in this way; it is only government that
has the audacity to “solve” traffic congestion by forcing private cars
(or trucks or taxis or whatever) off the road. According to this
principle, of course, the “ideal” solution to traffic congestion is
simply to outlaw all vehicles!

But this sort of attitude toward the consumer is not confined to traffic
on the streets. New York City, for example, has suffered periodically
from a water “shortage.” Here is a situation where, for many years, the
city government has had a compulsory monopoly of the supply of water to
its citizens. Failing to supply enough water, and failing to price that
water in such a way as to clear the market, to equate supply and demand
(which private enterprise does automatically), New York’s response to
water shortages has always been to blame *not* itself, but the consumer,
whose sin has been to use “too much” water. The city administration
could only react by outlawing the sprinkling of lawns, restricting use
of water, and demanding that people drink less water. In this way,
government transfers its own failings to the scapegoat user, who is
threatened and bludgeoned instead of being served well and efficiently.

There has been similar response by government to the ever-accelerating
crime problem in New York City. Instead of providing efficient police
protection, the city’s reaction has been to force the innocent citizen
to stay out of crime-prone areas. Thus, after Central Park in Manhattan
became a notorious center for muggings and other crime in the night
hours, New York City’s “solution” to the problem was to impose a curfew,
banning use of the park in those hours. In short, if an innocent citizen
wants to stay in Central Park at night, it is he who is arrested for
disobeying the curfew; it is, of course, easier to arrest him than to
rid the park of crime.

In short, while the long-held motto of private enterprise is that “the
customer is always right,” the implicit maxim of government operation is
that the customer is always to be blamed.

Of course, the political bureaucrats have a standard response to the
mounting complaints of poor and inefficient service: “The taxpayers must
give us more money!” It is not enough that the “public sector,” and its
corollary in taxation, has been growing far more rapidly in this century
than the national income. It is not enough that the flaws and headaches
of government operation have multiplied along with the increased burden
of the government budget. We are supposed to pour still more money down
the governmental rathole!

The proper counter-argument to the political demand for more tax money
is the question: “How is it that private enterprise doesn’t have these
problems?” How is it that hi-fi manufacturers or photocopy companies or
computer firms or whatever do not have trouble finding capital to expand
their output? Why don’t *they* issue manifestos denouncing the investing
public for not providing *them* with more money to serve consumer needs?
The answer is that consumers pay for the hi-fi sets or the photocopy
machines or the computers, and that investors, as a result, know that
they can make money by investing in those businesses. On the private
market, firms that successfully serve the public find it easy to obtain
capital for expansion; inefficient, unsuccessful firms do not, and
eventually have to go out of business. But there is no profit-and-loss
mechanism in *government* to induce investment in efficient operations
and to penalize and drive the inefficient or obsolete ones out of
business. There are no profits or losses in government operations
inducing either expansion or contraction of operations. In government,
then, no one truly “invests,” and no one can insure that successful
operations will expand and unsuccessful ones disappear. In contrast,
government must raise its “capital” by literally conscripting it through
the coercive mechanism of taxation.

Many people, including some government officials, think that these
problems could be solved if only “government were run like a business.”
The government then sets up a pseudocorporate monopoly, run by
government, which is supposed to set affairs on a “business basis.” This
has been done, for example, in the case of the Post Office—now the U.S.
“Postal Service”—and in the case of the ever-crumbling and decaying New
York City Transit Authority.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap10_fn1)^ The
“corporations” are enjoined to end their chronic deficits and are
allowed to float bonds on the bond market. It is true that direct users
then would be taking some of the burden off the mass of taxpayers, which
include users and nonusers alike. But there are fatal flaws inherent in
any government operation which cannot be avoided by this pseudobusiness
device. In the first place, government service is always a monopoly or
semimonopoly. Often, as in the case of the Postal Service or the Transit
Authority, it is a compulsory monopoly—all or nearly all private
competition is outlawed. The monopoly means that government service will
be far more costly, higher priced, and poorer in quality than would be
the case in the free market. Private enterprise gains a profit by
cutting costs as much as it can. Government, which cannot go bankrupt or
suffer losses in any case, need not cut costs; protected from
competition as well as losses, it need only cut its service or simply
raise prices. A second fatal flaw is that, try as it may, a government
corporation can *never* be run as a business because its *capital*
continues to be conscripted from the taxpayer. There is no way of
avoiding that; the fact that the government corporation may raise bonds
on the market still rests on the ultimate power of taxation to redeem
these bonds.

Finally, there is another critical problem inherent in any government
operation of a business. One of the reasons that private firms are
models of efficiency is because the free market establishes prices which
permit them to *calculate*, to figure out what their costs are and
therefore what they must do to make profits and avoid losses. It is
through this price system, as well as through the motivation to increase
profits and avoid losses, that goods and services are properly allocated
in the market among all the intricate branches and areas of production
that make up the modern industrial “capitalist” economy. It is economic
calculation that makes this marvel possible; in contrast, central
planning, such as is attempted under socialism, is deprived of accurate
pricing, and therefore *cannot* calculate costs and prices. This is the
major reason that central socialist planning has increasingly proved to
be a failure as the communist countries have become industrialized. It
is because central planning cannot determine prices and costs with any
accuracy that the communist countries of Eastern 5/18/2010Europe have
been moving rapidly away from socialist planning and toward a
free-market economy.

If central planning, then, thrusts the economy into hopeless
calculational chaos, and into irrational allocations and production
operations, the advance of government activities inexorably introduces
ever greater *islands* of such chaos into the economy, and makes
calculation of costs and rational allocation of production resources
more and more difficult. As government operations expand and the market
economy withers, the calculational chaos becomes more and more
disruptive and the economy increasingly unworkable.

The ultimate libertarian program may be summed up in one phrase: the
*abolition* of the public sector, the conversion of all operations and
services performed by the government into activities performed
voluntarily by the private-enterprise economy. Let us now turn from
general considerations of government as contrasted with private activity
to some of the major areas of government operation and how they could be
performed by the free-market economy.

