# 4 THE PROBLEMS [11-chap04.html#page89]

Let us take a brief look at the major problem areas of our society and
see if we can detect any “red thread” that runs through all of them.

*High taxes*. High and rising taxes have crippled almost everyone and
are hampering productivity, incentives, and thrift, as well as the free
energies of the people. On the federal level, there is a rising
rebellion against the burden of income taxes, and there is a flourishing
tax rebel movement, with its own organizations and magazines, which
refuses to pay a tax which it regards as predatory and unconstitutional.
On the state and local levels, there is a rising tide of sentiment
against oppressive property taxes. Thus, a record 1.2 million California
voters signed the petition for the Jarvis-Gann initiative on the 1978
ballot, a proposal which would drastically and permanently lower
property taxes by two-thirds to one percent and place ceilings upon the
assessed value of the property. Furthermore, the Jarvis-Gann initiative
enforces the freeze by requiring the approval of two-thirds of all
registered voters in the state of California to raise property taxes
beyond the one-percent ceiling. And, to make sure that the state doesn’t
simply substitute some other tax, the initiative also requires a
two-thirds vote by the state legislature to increase any other tax in
the state.

Furthermore, in the fall of 1977, scores of thousands of homeowners in
Cook County, Illinois, engaged in a tax strike against the property tax,
which had increased dramatically due to higher assessments.

It need hardly be emphasized that taxation, of income, property, or
whatever, is the exclusive monopoly of government. No other individual
or organization enjoys the privilege of taxation, of acquiring its
income by coercion.

*Urban fiscal crisis*. Throughout the nation, states and localities are
having difficulty paying interest and principal due on their swollen
public debt. New York City has already pioneered in a partial default on
its contractual obligations: The urban fiscal crisis is simply a matter
of urban governments spending too much, more even than the high taxes
they extract from us. Again, how much urban or state governments spend
is up to them; once again, government is to blame.

*Vietnam and other foreign interventions.* The war in Vietnam was a
total disaster for American foreign policy; after countless people were
murdered and the land devastated, and at an enormous cost in resources,
the American-supported government finally collapsed in early 1975. The
disaster of the Vietnam war has properly called the rest of America’s
interventionist foreign policy into severe question, and was partly
responsible for Congress’s putting a brake on U.S. military intervention
in the Angolan fiasco. Foreign policy, of course, is also an exclusive
monopoly of the federal government. The war was waged by our armed
forces which, again, are a compulsory monopoly of the same federal
government. So the government is wholly responsible for the entire war
and foreign policy problem, as a whole and in all of its aspects.

*Crime in the streets.* Consider: the crime in question is being
committed, by definition, on the streets. The streets are owned, almost
universally, by government, which thereby has a virtual monopoly of
street-ownership. The police, who are supposed to guard us against this
crime, are a compulsory monopoly of the government. And the courts,
which are in the business of convicting and punishing criminals, are
also a coercive monopoly of the government. So government has been in
charge of every single aspect of the crime-in-the-streets problem. The
failure here, just as the failure in Vietnam, must be chalked up solely
to government.

*Traffic congestion*. Once again, this occurs solely on government-owned
streets and roads.

*The military-industrial complex*. This complex is entirely a creature
of the federal government. It is the government that decides to spend
countless billions on overkill weaponry, it is the government that hands
out contracts, the government that subsidizes inefficiency through
cost-plus guarantees, the government that builds plants and leases or
gives them outright to contractors. Of course, the businesses involved
lobby for these privileges, but it is only through government that the
mechanism for this privilege, and this wasteful misallocation of
resources, can possibly exist.

*Transportation.* The crisis of transportation involves not only
congested streets, but also decaying railroads, overpriced airlines,
airport congestion at peak hours, and subways (e.g., New York City) that
are suffering deficits and visibly heading toward collapse. Yet: the
railroads were overbuilt from extensive government subsidies (federal,
state, and local) during the nineteenth century, and have been the most
heavily regulated industry for the longest period of time in American
history. Airlines are cartelized through regulation by the Civil
Aeronautics Board and subsidized through such regulation, mail
contracts, and virtually free airports. Airports for commercial lines
are all owned by branches of the government, largely local. The New York
City subways have been government-owned for decades.

*River pollution*. The rivers are, in effect, unowned, i.e., they have
been kept as “public domain” owned by government. Furthermore, by far
the biggest culprits in water pollution are the municipally owned sewage
disposal systems. Again: government is at the same time the largest
polluter, as well as the careless “owner” of the resource.

*Water shortages.* Water shortages are chronic in some areas of the
country, and intermittent in others, such as New York City. Yet the
government, (1) via its ownership of the public domain, owns the rivers
from which much of the water comes, and (2) as virtually the only
commercial supplier of water, the government owns the reservoirs and
water conduits.

*Air pollution.* Again, the government, as owner of the public domain,
“owns” the air. Furthermore, it has been the courts, owned solely by the
government, which, as an act of deliberate policy, have for generations
failed to protect our property rights in our bodies and orchards from
the pollution generated by industry. Moreover, much of the direct
pollution comes from government-owned plants.

*Power shortages and blackouts.* Throughout the land, state and local
governments have created compulsory monopolies of gas and electric power
and have granted these monopoly privileges to private utility companies,
which are then regulated and have their rates set by government agencies
to insure a permanent and fixed profit. Again, government has been the
source of the monopoly and the regulation.

*Telephone service.* Increasingly failing telephone service comes,
again, from a utility which receives a compulsory monopoly privilege
from government, and which finds its rates set by government to
guarantee a profit. As in the case of gas and electricity, no one is
allowed to compete with the monopoly phone company.

*Postal service.* Suffering from heavy deficits throughout its
existence, the postal service, in stark contrast to the goods and
services produced by private industry on the free market, has become
steadily higher in price and lower in quality. The mass of the public,
using first-class mail, has been forced to subsidize businesses using
second- and third-class services. Again, the Post Office has been, since
the late nineteenth century, a compulsory monopoly of government.
Whenever private firms have been allowed to compete, even illegally, in
delivery of mail, they have invariably provided better service at a
lower price.

*Television.* Television consists of bland programs and distorted news.
Radio and television channels have been nationalized for half a century
by the federal government, which grants channels as a gift to privileged
licensees, and can and does withdraw these gifts when a station
displeases the government’s Federal Communications Commission. How can
any genuine freedom of speech or of the press exist under such
conditions?

*Welfare system*. Welfare, of course, is exclusively the province of
government, largely state and local.

*Urban housing.* Along with traffic, one of our most conspicuous urban
failures. Yet there are few other industries that have been so closely
intertwined with government. Urban planning has controlled and regulated
the cities. Zoning laws have ringed housing and land use with
innumerable restrictions. Property taxes have crippled urban development
and forced abandonment of houses. Building codes have restricted housing
construction and made it more costly. Urban renewal has provided massive
subsidies to real estate developers, forced the bulldozing of apartments
and rental stores, lowered the supply of housing, and intensified racial
discrimination. Extensive government loans have generated overbuilding
in the suburbs. Rent controls have created apartment shortages and
reduced the supply of residential housing.

*Union strikes and restrictions*. Unions have become a nuisance with
power to cripple the economy, but only as a result of numerous special
privileges afforded by the government; especially various immunities
accorded unions, particularly the Wagner Act of 1935, still in effect,
which compels employers to bargain with unions which gain a majority
vote of a “bargaining unit” arbitrarily defined by the government
itself.

*Education.* Once as revered and sacrosanct in American opinion as
motherhood or the flag, the public school, in recent years, has come
under widespread attack, from all parts of the political spectrum. Even
its supporters would not presume to maintain that the public schools
actually teach much of anything. And we have recently seen extreme cases
in which the actions of the public schools have motivated a violent
reaction in such widely different areas as South Boston and Kanawha
County, West Virginia. The public schools, of course, are totally owned
and operated by state and local government—with considerable assist and
coordination from the federal level. The public schools are backed up by
compulsory attendance laws which force all children through high school
age to attend school—either public or private schools certified by
governmental authorities. Higher education, too, has become closely
intertwined with government in recent decades: many universities are
government-owned, and the others are systematic receivers of grants,
subsidies, and contracts.

*Inflation and stagflation.* The United States, as well as the rest of
the world, has been suffering for many years from chronic and
accelerating inflation, an inflation accompanied by high unemployment
and persisting through severe as well as mild recessions
(“stagflation”). An explanation of these unwelcome phenomena will be
presented below; here let it be said that the root cause is in a
continuing expansion of the money supply, a compulsory monopoly of the
federal government (anyone who presumes to compete with the government’s
issuing of money goes to jail for counterfeiting). A vital part of the
nation’s money supply is issued as “checkbook money” by the banking
system, which in turn is under total control by the federal government
and its Federal Reserve System.

*Watergate.* Finally, and not least, is the entire traumatic syndrome
suffered by Americans known as “Watergate.” What Watergate has meant is
a total desanctifying of the President and of such previously sacrosanct
federal institutions as the CIA and the FBI. The invasions of property,
the police state methods, the deception of the public, the corruption,
the manifold and systemic commissions of crime by a once virtually
all-powerful President led to a once unthinkable impeachment of a
President and of a widespread and well-justified lack of trust in all
politicians and all government officials. The Establishment has often
bemoaned this new, pervasive lack of trust, but has not been able to
restore the naive public faith of pre-Watergate days. The liberal
historian Cecilia Kenyon once chastised the Anti-Federalists—the
defenders of the Articles of Confederation and opponents of the
Constitution—as being “Men of Little Faith” in the institutions of
government. One suspects that she would not be quite so naive if she
were writing that article in the post-Watergate
era.^[1](#24-notes.html#chap04_fn1)^

Watergate, of course, is purely and totally a governmental phenomenon.
The President is the chief executive of the federal government, the
“plumbers” were his instrument, and the FBI and the CIA are governmental
agencies as well. And it is, quite understandably, faith and trust in
government that was shattered by Watergate.

If we look around, then, at the crucial problem areas of our society—the
areas of crisis and failure—we find in each and every case a “red
thread” marking and uniting them all: the thread of government. In every
one of these cases, government either has totally run or heavily
influenced the activity. John Kenneth Galbraith, in his best-selling
*The Affluent Society*, recognized that the government sector was the
focus of our social failure—but drew instead the odd lesson that
therefore still more funds and resources must be diverted from the
private to the public sector. He thereby ignored the fact that the role
of government in America—federal, state, and local—has expanded
enormously, both absolutely and proportionately, in this century and
especially in recent decades. Unfortunately, Galbraith never once raised
the question: Is there something inherent in government operation and
activity, something which creates the very failures which we see
abounding? We shall investigate some of the major problems of government
and of liberty in this country, see where the failures came from, and
propound the solutions of the new libertarianism.

