# 14 WAR AND FOREIGN POLICY [21-chap14.html#page329]

## “ISOLATIONISM,” LEFT AND RIGHT [isolationism-left-and-right]

“Isolationism” was coined as a smear term to apply to opponents of
American entry into World War II. Since the word was often applied
through guilt-by-association to mean pro-Nazi, “isolationist” took on a
“right wing” as well as a generally negative flavor. If not actively
pro-Nazi, “isolationists” were at the very least narrow-minded
ignoramuses ignorant of the world around them, in contrast to the
sophisticated, worldly, *caring* “internationalists” who favored
American crusading around the globe. in the last decade, of course,
antiwar forces have been considered “leftists,” and interventionists
from Lyndon Johnson to Jimmy Carter and their followers have constantly
tried to pin the “isolationist” or at least “neoisolationist” label on
today’s left wing.

Left or right? During World War I, opponents of the war were bitterly
attacked, just as now, as “leftists,” even though they included in their
ranks libertarians and advocates of laissez-faire capitalism. In fact,
the major center of opposition to the American war with spain and the
American war to crush the Philippine rebellion at the turn of the
century was laissez-faire liberals, men like the sociologist and
economist William Graham Sumner, and the Boston merchant Edward
Atkinson, who founded the “Anti-Imperialist League.” Furthermore,
Atkinson and Sumner were squarely in the great tradition of the
classical English liberals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
and in particular such laissez-faire “extremists” as Richard Cobden and
John Bright of the “Manchester School.” Cobden and Bright took the lead
in vigorously opposing every British war and foreign political
intervention of their era and for his pains Cobden was known not as an
“isolationist” but as the “International
Man.”^[1](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn1)^ Until the smear campaign of the
late 1930s, opponents of war were considered the true
“internationalists,” men who opposed the aggrandizement of the
nation-state and favored peace, free trade, free migration and peaceful
cultural exchanges among peoples of all nations. Foreign intervention is
“international” only in the sense that war is international: coercion,
whether the threat of force or the outright movement of troops, will
always cross frontiers between one nation and another.

“Isolationism” has a right-wing sound; “neutralism” and “peaceful
coexistence” sound leftish. But their essence is the same: opposition to
war and political intervention between countries. This has been the
position of antiwar forces for two centuries, whether they were the
classical liberals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the
“leftists” of World War I and the Cold War, or the “rightists” of World
War II. In very few cases have these anti-interventionists favored
literal “isolation”: what they have generally favored is political
nonintervention in the affairs of other countries, coupled with economic
and cultural internationalism in the sense of peaceful freedom of trade,
investment, and interchange between the citizens of all countries. And
this is the essence of the libertarian position as well.

## LIMITING GOVERNMENT [limiting-government]

Libertarians favor the abolition of all States everywhere, and the
provision of legitimate functions now supplied poorly by governments
(police, courts, etc.) by means of the free market. Libertarians favor
liberty as a natural human right, and advocate it not only for Americans
but for all peoples. In a purely libertarian world, therefore, there
would be no “foreign policy” because there would be no States, no
governments with a monopoly of coercion over particular territorial
areas. But since we live in a world of nation-states, and since this
system is hardly likely to disappear in the near future, what is the
attitude of libertarians toward foreign policy in the current
State-ridden world?

Pending the dissolution of States, libertarians desire to *limit*, to
whittle down, the area of government power in all directions and as much
as possible. We have already demonstrated how this principle of
“de-statizing” might work in various important “domestic” problems,
where the goal is to push back the role of government and to allow the
voluntary and spontaneous energies of free persons full scope through
peaceful interaction, notably in the free-market economy. In foreign
affairs, the goal is the same: to keep government from interfering in
the affairs of other governments or other countries. Political
“isolationism” and peaceful coexistence—refraining from acting upon
other countries—is, then, the libertarian counterpart to agitating for
laissez-faire policies at home. The idea is to shackle government from
acting abroad just as we try to shackle government at home. Isolationism
or peaceful coexistence is the foreign policy counterpart of severely
limiting government at home.

Specifically, the entire land area of the world is now parcelled out
among various States, and each land area is ruled by a central
government with monopoly of violence over that area. In relations
between States, then, the libertarian goal is to keep each of these
States from extending their violence to other countries, so that each
State’s tyranny is at least confined to its own bailiwick. For the
libertarian is interested in reducing as much as possible the area of
State aggression against all private individuals. The only way to do
this, in international affairs, is for the people of each country to
pressure their own State to confine its activities to the area it
monopolizes and not to attack other States or aggress against their
subjects. In short, the objective of the libertarian is to confine any
existing State to as small a degree of invasion of person and property
as possible. And this means the total avoidance of war. The people under
each State should pressure “their” respective States not to attack one
another, or, if a conflict should break out, to withdraw from it as
quickly as physically possible.

Let us assume for the moment, a world with two hypothetical countries:
Graustark and Belgravia. Each is ruled by its own State. What happens if
the government of Graustark invades the territory of Belgravia? From the
libertarian point of view two evils immediately occur. First, the
Graustark Army begins to slaughter innocent Belgravian civilians,
persons who are not implicated in whatever crimes the Belgravian
government might have committed. War, then, is mass murder, and this
massive invasion of the right to life, of self-ownership, of numbers of
people is not only a crime but, for the libertarian, the ultimate crime.
Second, since all governments obtain their revenue from the thievery of
coercive taxation, any mobilization and launching of troops inevitably
involve an increase in tax-coercion in Graustark. For both
reasons—because inter-State wars inevitably involve both mass murder and
an increase in tax-coercion, the libertarian opposes war. Period.

It was not always thus. During the Middle Ages, the scope of wars was
far more limited. Before the rise of modern weapons, armaments were so
limited that governments could—and often *did*—strictly confine their
violence to the *armies* of the rival governments. It is true that
tax-coercion increased, but at least there was no mass murder of the
innocents. Not only was firepower low enough to confine violence to the
armies of the contending sides, but in the premodern era there was no
central nation-state that spoke inevitably in the name of all
inhabitants of a given land area. If one set of kings or barons fought
another, it was not felt that everyone in the area must be a dedicated
partisan. Moreover, instead of mass conscript armies enslaved to their
respective rulers, armies were small bands of hired mercenaries. Often,
a favorite sport for the populace was to observe a battle from the
safety of the town ramparts, and war was regarded as something of a
sporting match. But with the rise of the centralizing State and of
modern weapons of mass destruction, the slaughter of civilians, as well
as conscript armies, have become a vital part of inter-State warfare.

Suppose that despite possible libertarian opposition, war has broken
out. Clearly, the libertarian position should be that, so long as the
war continues, the scope of assault upon innocent civilians must be
diminished as much as possible. Old-fashioned international law had two
excellent devices to accomplish this goal: the “laws of war,” and the
“laws of neutrality” or “neutrals’ rights.” The laws of neutrality were
designed to keep any war confined to the warring States themselves,
without attacks upon nonwarring States and, particularly, aggression
against the peoples of other nations. Hence the importance of such
ancient and now almost forgotten American principles as “freedom of the
seas” or severe limitations upon the rights of warring States to
blockade neutral trade with the enemy country. In short, the libertarian
tries to induce neutral States to *remain* neutral in any inter-State
conflict, and to induce the warring States to observe fully the rights
of neutral citizens. The “laws of war,” for their part, were designed to
limit as much as possible the invasion by warring States of the rights
of civilians in their respective countries. As the British jurist F.J.P.
Veale put it:

> The fundamental principle of this code was that hostilities between
> civilized peoples must be limited to the armed forces actually
> engaged. ... It drew a distinction between combatants and
> non-combatants by laying down that the sole business of the combatants
> is to fight each other and, consequently, that non-combatants must be
> excluded from the scope of military
> operations.^[2](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn2)^

In the modified form of prohibiting the bombardment of all cities not in
the front line, this rule held in Western European wars in recent
centuries until Britain launched the strategic bombing of civilians in
World War II. Now, of course, the entire concept is scarcely remembered,
since the very nature of modern nuclear warfare rests upon the
annihilation of civilians.

To return to our hypothetical Graustark and Belgravia, suppose that
Graustark has invaded Belgravia, and that a third government, Walldavia,
now leaps into the war in order to defend Belgravia against
“Graustarkian aggression.” Is this action justifiable? Here, indeed, is
the germ of the pernicious twentieth-century theory of “collective
security”—the idea that when one government “aggresses” against another,
it is the moral obligation of the other governments of the world to band
together to defend the “victimized” State.

There are several fatal flaws in this concept of collective security
against “aggression.” One is that when Walldavia, or any other States,
leap into the fray they are themselves expanding and compounding the
extent of the aggression, because they are (1) unjustly slaughtering
masses of Graustarkian civilians, and (2) increasing tax-coercion over
Walldavian citizens. Furthermore, (3) in this age when States and
subjects are closely identifiable, Walldavia is thereby leaving
Walldavian civilians open to retaliation by Graustarkian bombers or
missiles. Thus, entry into the war by the Walldavian government puts
into jeopardy the very lives and properties of Walldavian citizens which
the government is *supposed* to be protecting. Finally, (4)
conscription-enslavement of Walldavian citizens will usually intensify.

If this kind of “collective security” should really be applied on a
worldwide scale, with all the “Walldavias” rushing into every local
conflict and escalating them, every local skirmish would soon be raised
into a global conflagration.

There is another crucial flaw in the collective security concept. The
idea of entering a war in order to stop “aggression” is clearly an
analogy from aggression by one *individual* upon another. Smith is seen
to be beating up Jones—aggressing against him. Nearby police then rush
to the defense of the victim Jones; they are using “police action” to
stop aggression. It was in pursuit of this myth, for example, that
President Truman persisted in referring to American entry into the
Korean war as a “police action,” a collective UN effort to repel
“aggression.”

But “aggression” only makes sense on the individual Smith-Jones level,
as does the very term “police action.” These terms make no sense
whatever on an inter-State level. First, we have seen that governments
entering a war thereby become aggressors themselves against innocent
civilians; indeed, become mass murderers. The *correct* analogy to
individual action would be: Smith beats up Jones, the police rush in to
help Jones, and in the course of trying to apprehend Smith, the police
bomb a city block and murder thousands of people, or spray machine-gun
fire into an innocent crowd. *This* is a far more accurate analogy, for
that is what a warring government does, and in the twentieth century it
does so on a monumental scale. But any police agency that behaves this
way *itself* becomes a criminal aggressor, often far more so than the
original Smith who began the affair.

But there is yet another fatal flaw in the analogy with individual
aggression. When Smith beats up Jones or steals his property we can
identify Smith as an aggressor upon the personal or property right of
his victim. But when the Graustarkian State invades the territory of the
Belgravian State, it is impermissible to refer to “aggression” in an
analogous way. For the libertarian, no government has a just claim to
any property or “sovereignty” right in a given territorial area. The
Belgravian State’s claim to its territory is therefore totally different
from Mr. Jones’s claim to his property (although the latter might also,
on investigation, turn out to be the illegitimate result of theft). No
State has any legitimate property; all of its territory is the result of
some kind of aggression and violent conquest. Hence the Graustarkian
State’s invasion is necessarily a battle between two sets of thieves and
aggressors: the only problem is that innocent civilians on both sides
are being trampled upon.

Aside from this general caveat on governments, the so-called “aggressor”
State often has a quite plausible claim on its “victim”; plausible, that
is, within the context of the nation-state system. Suppose that
Graustark has crossed the Belgravian border because Belgravia had, a
century earlier, invaded Graustark and seized its northeastern
provinces. The inhabitants of these provinces are culturally,
ethnically, and linguistically Graustarkian. Graustark now invades in
order to be reunited at last with its fellow Graustarkians. In this
situation, by the way, the libertarian, while condemning both
governments for making war and killing civilians, would have to side
with Graustark as having the more just, or the less unjust, claim. Let
us put it this way: In the unlikely event that the two countries could
return to premodern warfare, with (a) weapons limited so that no
civilians were injured in their persons or property; (b) volunteer
rather than conscript armies; and also (c) financing by voluntary
methods instead of taxation; the libertarian could then, given our
context, side unreservedly with Graustark.

Of all the recent wars, none has come closer—though not completely so—to
satisfying these three criteria for a “just war” than the Indian war of
late 1971 for the liberation of Bangla Desh. The government of Pakistan
had been created as a last terrible legacy of Imperial Britain to the
Indian subcontinent. In particular, the nation of Pakistan consisted of
imperial rule by the Punjabis of West Pakistan over the more numerous
and productive Bengalis of East Pakistan (and also over the Pathans of
the North-West Frontier). The Bengalis had long been yearning for
independence from their imperial oppressors; in early 1971, parliament
was suspended as a result of Bengali victory in the elections; from then
on, Punjabi troops systematically slaughtered the civilian Bengal
population. Indian entry into the conflict aided the popular Bengali
resistance forces of the Mukhti Bahini. While taxes and conscription
were, of course, involved, the Indian armies did not use their weapons
against Bengali civilians; on the contrary, here was a genuine
revolutionary war of the Bengali public *against* a Punjabi occupying
State. Only Punjabi soldiers were on the receiving end of Indian
bullets.

This example points up another characteristic of warfare: that
revolutionary guerrilla war *can be* far more consistent with
libertarian principles than any inter-State war. By the very nature of
their activities, guerrillas defend the civilian population *against*
the depredations of a State; hence, guerrillas, inhabiting as they do
the same country as the enemy State, *cannot* use nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction. Further: since guerrillas rely for victory
on the support and aid of the civilian population, they *must*, as a
basic part of their strategy, spare civilians from harm and pinpoint
their activities solely against the State apparatus and its armed
forces. Hence, guerrilla war returns us to the ancient and honorable
virtue of pinpointing the enemy and sparing innocent civilians. And
guerrillas, as part of their quest for enthusiastic civilian support,
often refrain from conscription and taxation and rely on voluntary
support for men and materiel.

The libertarian qualities of guerrilla warfare reside only on the
revolutionary side; for the counterrevolutionary forces of the State, it
is quite a different story. While the State cannot go to the length of
“nuking” its own subjects, it does, of necessity, rely primarily on
campaigns of mass terror: killing, terrorizing, and rounding up the mass
of civilians. Since guerrillas, to be successful, must be supported by
the bulk of the population, the State, in order to wage its war, must
concentrate on destroying that population, or must herd masses of
civilians into concentration camps in order to separate them from their
guerrilla allies. This tactic was used by the Spanish general, “Butcher”
Weyler, against the Cuban rebels in the 1890s, was continued by the
American troops in the Philippines, and by the British in the Boer War,
and continues to be used down to the recent ill-fated “strategic hamlet”
policy in South Vietnam.

The libertarian foreign policy, then, is *not* a pacifist policy. We do
not hold, as do the pacifists, that no individual has the right to use
violence in defending himself against violent attack. What we *do* hold
is that no one has the right to conscript, tax, or murder others, or to
use violence against others in order to defend himself. Since all States
exist and have their being in aggression against their subjects and in
the acquiring of their present territory, and since inter-State wars
slaughter innocent civilians, such wars are always unjust—although some
may be more unjust than others. Guerrilla warfare against States at
least has the potential for meeting libertarian requirements by
pinpointing the guerrilla’s battle against State officials and armies,
and by their use of voluntary methods to staff and finance their
struggle.

## AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY [american-foreign-policy]

We have seen that libertarians have as their prime responsibility the
focussing on the invasions and aggressions of their *own* State. The
libertarians of Graustark must center their attentions on attempting to
limit and whittle down the Graustark State, the Walldavian libertarians
must try to check the Walldavian State, and so on. In foreign affairs,
the libertarians of every country must press *their* government to
refrain from war and foreign intervention, and to withdraw from any war
in which they may be engaged. If for no other reason, then, libertarians
in the United States must center their critical attention on the
imperial and warlike activities of their own government.

But there are still other reasons for libertarians here to focus upon
the invasions and foreign interventions of the United States. For
empirically, taking the twentieth century as a whole, the single most
warlike, most interventionist, most imperialist government has been the
United States. Such a statement is bound to shock Americans, subject as
we have been for decades to intense propaganda by the Establishment on
the invariable saintliness, peaceful intentions, and devotion to justice
of the American government in foreign affairs.

The expansionist impulse of the American State began to take increasing
hold in the late nineteenth century, leaping boldly overseas with
America’s war against Spain, dominating Cuba, grabbing Puerto Rico and
the Philippines, and brutally suppressing a Filipino rebellion for
independence. The imperial expansion of the United States reached full
flower in World War I, when President Woodrow Wilson’s leap into the
fray prolonged the war and the mass slaughter, and unwittingly bred the
grisly devastation that led directly to the Bolshevik triumph in Russia
and the Nazi victory in Germany. It was Wilson’s particular genius to
supply a pietistic and moralistic cloak for a new American policy of
worldwide intervention and domination, a policy of trying to mould every
country in the American image, suppressing radical or Marxist regimes on
the one hand and old-fashioned monarchist governments on the other. It
was Woodrow Wilson who was to fix the broad features of American foreign
policy for the rest of this century. Almost every succeeding President
has considered himself a Wilsonian and followed his policies. It was no
accident that both Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt—so long
thought of as polar opposites—played important roles in America’s first
global crusade of World War I, and that both men harked back to their
experience in World War I intervention and planning as the guideposts
for their future foreign and domestic policies. And it was one of
Richard Nixon’s first acts as President to place Woodrow Wilson’s
picture upon his desk.

In the name of “national self-determination” and “collective security”
against aggression, the American government has consistently pursued a
goal and a policy of world domination and of the forcible suppression of
any rebellion against the status quo anywhere in the world. In the name
of combatting “aggression” everywhere—of being the world’s
“policeman”—it has itself become a great and continuing aggressor.

Anyone who balks at such a description of American policy should simply
consider what the typical American reaction is to *any* domestic or
foreign crisis anywhere on the globe, even at some remote site that
cannot by any stretch of the imagination be considered a direct or even
indirect threat to the lives and security of the American people. The
military dictator of “Bumblestan” is in danger; perhaps his subjects are
tired of being exploited by him and his colleagues. The United States
then becomes gravely concerned; articles by journalists friendly to the
State Department or the Pentagon spread the alarm about what might
happen to the “stability” of Bumblestan and its surrounding area if the
dictator should be toppled. For it so happens that he is a
“pro-American” or “pro-Western” dictator: that is, he is one of “ours”
instead of “theirs.” Millions or even billions of dollars’ worth of
military and economic aid are then rushed by the United States to prop
up the Bumblestani field marshal. If “our” dictator is saved, then a
sigh of relief is heaved, and congratulations are passed around at the
saving of “our” State. The continuing or intensified oppression of the
American taxpayer and of the Bumblestanian citizens are, of course, not
considered in the equation. Or if it should happen that the Bumblestani
dictator may fall, hysteria might hit the American press and officialdom
for the moment. But then, after a while, the American people seem to be
able to live their lives after “losing” Bumblestan about as well as
before—perhaps even better, if it means a few billion less in foreign
aid extracted from them to prop up the Bumblestani State.

If it is understood and expected, then, that the United States will try
to impose its will on every crisis everywhere in the world, then this is
clear indication that America is the great interventionary and imperial
power. The one place where the United States does not now attempt to
work its will is the Soviet Union and the Communist countries—but, of
course, it has tried to do so in the past. Woodrow Wilson, along with
Britain and France, tried for several years to crush bolshevism in the
cradle, with American and Allied troops being sent to Russia to aid the
Czarist (“White”) forces in trying to defeat the Reds. After World War
II, the United States tried its best to oust the Soviets from Eastern
Europe, and succeeded in pushing them out of Azerbaijan in northwestern
Iran. It also helped the British to crush a Communist regime in Greece.
The United States tried its best to maintain Chiang Kai-shek’s
dictatorial rule in China, flying many of Chiang’s troops northward to
occupy Manchuria as the Russians pulled out after World War II; and it
continues to prevent the Chinese from occupying their offshore islands,
Quemoy and Matsu. After virtually installing the dictator Batista in
Cuba, the United States tried desperately to oust the Communist Castro
regime, by actions ranging from the CIA-engineered Bay of Pigs invasion
to CIA-Mafia attempts to assassinate Castro.

Of all America’s recent wars, certainly the most traumatic for Americans
and their attitude toward foreign policy was the Vietnam war. America’s
imperial war in Vietnam was, indeed, a microcosm of what has been
tragically wrong with American foreign policy in this century. American
intervention in Vietnam did not begin, as most people believe, with
Kennedy or Eisenhower or even Truman. It began no later than the date
when the American government, under Franklin Roosevelt, on November 26,
1941, delivered a sharp and insulting ultimatum to Japan to get its
armed forces out of China and Indochina, from what would later be
Vietnam. This U.S. ultimatum set the stage inevitably for Pearl Harbor.
Engaged in a war in the Pacific to oust Japan from the Asian continent,
the United States and its OSS (predecessor to the CIA) favored and aided
Ho Chi Minh’s Communist-run national resistance movement against the
Japanese. After World War II, the Communist Viet Minh was in charge of
all northern Vietnam. But then France, previously the imperial ruler of
Vietnam, betrayed its agreement with Ho and massacred Viet Minh forces.
In this double cross, France was aided by Britain and the United States.

When the French lost to the reconstituted Viet Minh guerrilla movement
under Ho, the United States endorsed the Geneva agreement of 1954, under
which Vietnam was to be quickly reunited as one nation. For it was
generally recognized that the postwar occupation divisions of the
country into North and South were purely arbitrary and merely for
military convenience. But, having by trickery managed to oust the Viet
Minh from the southern half of Vietnam, the United States proceeded to
break the Geneva agreement and to replace the French and their puppet
Emperor Bao Dai by its own clients, Ngo Dinh Diem and his family, who
were installed in dictatorial rule over South Vietnam. When Diem became
an embarrassment, the CIA engineered a coup to assassinate Diem and
replace him with another dictatorial regime. To suppress the Viet Cong,
the Communist-led national independence movement in the South, the
United States rained devastation on South and North Vietnam
alike—bombing and murdering a million Vietnamese and dragging half a
million American soldiers into the quagmires and jungles of Vietnam.

Throughout the tragic Vietnamese conflict, the United States maintained
the fiction that it was a war of “aggression” by the Communist North
Vietnamese State against a friendly and “pro-Western” (whatever that
term may mean) South Vietnamese State which had called for our aid.
Actually, the war was really a doomed but lengthy attempt by an imperial
United States to suppress the wishes of the great bulk of the Vietnamese
population and to maintain unpopular client dictators in the southern
half of the country, by virtual genocide if necessary.

Americans are not accustomed to applying the term “imperialism” to the
actions of the U.S. government, but the word is a particularly apt one.
In its broadest sense, *imperialism* may be defined as aggression by
State A against the people of country B, followed by the subsequent
coercive maintenance of such foreign rule. In our example above, the
permanent rule by the Graustark State over formerly northeastern
Belgravia would be an example of such imperialism. But imperialism does
not have to take the form of direct rule over the foreign population. In
the twentieth century, the indirect form of “neoimperialism” has
increasingly replaced the old-fashioned direct kind; it is more subtle
and less visible but no less effective a form of imperialism. In this
situation, the imperial State rules the foreign population through its
effective control over native client-rulers. This version of modern
Western imperialism has been trenchantly defined by the libertarian
historian Leonard Liggio:

> The imperialist power of the Western countries... imposed on the
> world’s peoples a double or reinforced system of
> exploitation—imperialism—by which the power of the Western governments
> maintains the local ruling class in exchange for the opportunity to
> superimpose Western exploitation upon existing exploitation by local
> states.^[3](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn3)^

This view of America as a long-time imperial world power has taken hold
among historians in recent years as the result of compelling and
scholarly work by a distinguished group of New Left revisionist
historians inspired by Professor William Appleman Williams. But this was
also the view of conservative as well as classical liberal
“isolationists” during World War II and in the early days of the Cold
War.^[4](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn4)^

## ISOLATIONIST CRITICISMS [isolationist-criticisms]

The last anti-interventionist and anti-imperialist thrust of the old
conservative and classical liberal isolationists came during the Korean
War. Conservative George Morgenstern, chief editorial writer of the
*Chicago Tribune* and author of the first revisionist book on Pearl
Harbor, published an article in the right-wing Washington weekly *Human
Events*, which detailed the grisly imperialist record of the United
States government from the Spanish-American War down to Korea.
Morgenstern noted that the “exalted nonsense” by which President
McKinley had justified the war against Spain was

> familiar to anyone who later attended the evangelical rationalizations
> of Wilson for intervening in the European war, of Roosevelt promising
> the millennium... of Eisenhower treasuring the “crusade in Europe”
> that somehow went sour, or of Truman, Stevenson, Paul Douglas or the
> *New York Times* preaching the holy war in
> Korea.^[5](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn5)^

In a widely noted speech at the height of the American defeat in North
Korea at the hands of the Chinese in late 1950, conservative
isolationist Joseph P. Kennedy called for U.S. withdrawal from Korea.
Kennedy proclaimed that “I naturally opposed Communism but I said if
portions of Europe or Asia wish to go Communistic or even have Communism
thrust upon them, we cannot stop it.” The result of the Cold War, the
Truman Doctrine, and the Marshall Plan, Kennedy charged, was disaster—a
failure to purchase friends and a threat of land war in Europe or Asia.
Kennedy warned that:

> half of this world will never submit to dictation by the other half.
> ... What business is it of ours to support French colonial policy in
> Indo-China or to achieve Mr. Syngman Rhee’s concepts of democracy in
> Korea? Shall we now send the Marines into the mountains of Tibet to
> keep the Dalai Lama on his throne?

Economically, Kennedy added, we have been burdening ourselves with
unnecessary debts as a consequence of Cold War policy. If we continue to
weaken our economy “with lavish spending either on foreign nations or in
foreign wars, we run the danger of precipitating another 1932 and of
destroying the very system which we are trying to save.”

Kennedy concluded that the only rational alternative for America is to
scrap the Cold War foreign policy altogether: “to get out of Korea” and
out of Berlin and Europe. The United States could not possibly contain
Russian armies if they chose to march through Europe, and if Europe
should then turn Communist, Communism

> may break of itself as a unified force. ... The more people that it
> will have to govern, the more necessary it becomes for those who
> govern to justify themselves to those being governed. The more peoples
> that are under its yoke, the greater are the possibilities of revolt.

And here, at a time when cold warriors were forecasting a world
Communist monolith as an eternal fact of life, Joseph Kennedy cited
Marshall Tito as pointing the way for the eventual breakup of the
Communist world: thus, “Mao in China is not likely to take his orders
from Stalin.”

Kennedy realized that

> this policy will, of course, be criticized as appeasement. \[But\]...
> is it appeasement to withdraw from unwise commitments. ... If it is
> wise in our interest not to make commitments that endanger our
> security, and this is appeasement, then I am for appeasement.

Kennedy concluded that “the suggestions I make \[would\] conserve
American lives for American ends, not waste them in the freezing hills
of Korea or on the battlescarred plains of Western
Germany.”^[6](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn6)^

One of the most trenchant and forceful attacks on American foreign
policy to emerge from the Korean War was leveled by the veteran
classical liberal journalist, Garet Garrett. Garrett began his pamphlet,
*The Rise of Empire* (1952), by declaring, “We have crossed the boundary
that lies between Republic and Empire.” Explicitly linking this thesis
with his notable pamphlet of the 1930s, *The Revolution Was*, which had
denounced the advent of executive and statist tyranny within the
republican form under the New Deal, Garrett once more saw a “revolution
within the form” of the old constitutional republic. Garrett, for
example, called Truman’s intervention in Korea without a declaration of
war a “usurpation” of congressional power.

In his pamphlet, Garrett adumbrated the criteria, the hallmarks for the
existence of Empire. The first is the dominance of the executive power,
a dominance reflected in the President’s unauthorized intervention in
Korea. The second is the subordination of domestic to foreign policy;
the third, the “ascendancy of the military mind”; the fourth, a “system
of satellite nations”; and the fifth, “a complex of vaunting and fear,”
a vaunting of unlimited national might combined with a continuing fear,
fear of the enemy, of the “barbarian,” and of the unreliability of the
satellite allies. Garrett found each one of these criteria to apply
fully to the United States.

Having discovered that the United States had developed all the hallmarks
of empire, Garrett added that the United States, like previous empires,
feels itself to be “a prisoner of history.” For beyond fear lies
“collective security,” and the playing of the supposedly destined
American role upon the world stage. Garrett concluded:

It is our turn.

Our turn to do what?

Our turn to assume the responsibilities of moral leadership in the
world,

Our turn to maintain a balance of power against the forces of evil
everywhere—in Europe and Asia and Africa, in the Atlantic and in the
Pacific, by air and by sea—evil in this case being the Russian
barbarian.

Our turn to keep the peace of the world.

Our turn to save civilization.

Our turn to serve mankind.

But this is the language of Empire. The Roman Empire never doubted that
it was the defender of civilization. Its good intentions were peace, law
and order. The Spanish Empire added salvation. The British Empire added
the noble myth of the white man’s burden. We have added freedom and
democracy. Yet the more that may be added to it the more it is the same
language still. A language of power.^[7](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn7)^

## WAR AS THE HEALTH OF THE STATE [war-as-the-health-of-the-state]

Many libertarians are uncomfortable with foreign policy matters and
prefer to spend their energies either on fundamental questions of
libertarian theory or on such “domestic” concerns as the free market or
privatizing postal service or garbage disposal. Yet an attack on war or
a warlike foreign policy is of crucial importance to libertarians. There
are two important reasons. One has become a cliché, but is all too true
nevertheless: the overriding importance of preventing a nuclear
holocaust. To all the long-standing reasons, moral and economic, against
an interventionist foreign policy has now been added the imminent,
ever-present threat of world destruction. If the world should be
destroyed, all the other problems and all the other isms—socialism,
capitalism, liberalism, or libertarianism—would be of no importance
whatsoever. Hence the prime importance of a peaceful foreign policy and
of ending the nuclear threat.

The other reason is that, apart from the nuclear menace, war, in the
words of the libertarian Randolph Bourne, “is the health of the State.”
War has always been the occasion of a great—and usually
permanent—acceleration and intensification of State power over society.
War is the great excuse for mobilizing all the energies and resources of
the nation, in the name of patriotic rhetoric, under the aegis and
dictation of the State apparatus. It is in war that the State really
comes into its own: swelling in power, in number, in pride, in absolute
dominion over the economy and the society. Society becomes a herd,
seeking to kill its alleged enemies, rooting out and suppressing all
dissent from the official war effort, happily betraying truth for the
supposed public interest. Society becomes an armed camp, with the values
and the morals—as the libertarian Albert Jay Nock once phrased it—of an
“army on the march.”

It is particularly ironic that war always enables the State to rally the
energies of its citizens under the slogan of helping it to defend the
country against some bestial outside menace. For the root myth that
enables the State to wax fat off war is the canard that war is a defense
*by* the State *of* its subjects. The facts, however, are precisely the
reverse. For if war is the health of the State, it is also its greatest
danger. A State can only “die” by defeat in war or by revolution. In
war, therefore, the State frantically mobilizes its subjects to fight
for *it* against another State, under the pretext that *it* is fighting
to defend them.^[8](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn8)^

In the history of the United States, war has generally been the main
occasion for the often permanent intensification of the power of the
State over society. In the War of 1812 against Great Britain, as we have
indicated above, the modern inflationary fractional-reserve banking
system first came into being on a large scale, as did protective
tariffs, internal federal taxation, and a standing army and navy. And a
direct consequence of the wartime inflation was the reestablishment of a
central bank, the Second Bank of the United States. Virtually all of
these statist policies and institutions continued permanently after the
war was over. The Civil War and its virtual one-party system led to the
permanent establishment of a neomercantilist policy of Big Government
and the subsidizing of various big business interests through protective
tariffs, huge land grants and other subsidies to railroads, federal
excise taxation, and a federally controlled banking system. It also
brought the first imposition of federal conscription and an income tax,
setting dangerous precedents for the future. World War I brought the
decisive and fateful turn from a relatively free and laissez-faire
economy to the present system of corporate state monopoly at home and
permanent global intervention abroad. The collectivist economic
mobilization during the war, headed by War Industries Board Chairman
Bernard Baruch, fulfilled the emerging dream of big business leaders and
progressive intellectuals for a cartelized and monopolized economy
planned by the federal government in cozy collaboration with big
business leadership. And it was precisely this wartime collectivism that
nurtured and developed a nationwide labor movement that would eagerly
take its place as junior partner in the new corporate State economy.
This temporary collectivism, furthermore, served as a permanent beacon
and model for big business leaders and corporatist politicians as the
kind of permanent peacetime economy that they would like to impose on
the United States. As food czar, Secretary of Commerce, and later as
president, Herbert C. Hoover helped bring this continuing monopolized
statist economy into being, and the vision was fulfilled in a
recrudescence of wartime agencies and even wartime personnel by Franklin
D. Roosevelt’s New Deal.^[9](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn9)^ World War I
also brought a permanent Wilsonian global intervention abroad, the
fastening of the newly imposed Federal Reserve System and a permanent
income tax on society, high federal budgets, massive conscription, and
intimate connections between economic boom, war contracts, and loans to
Western nations.

World War II was the culmination and fulfillment of all these trends:
Franklin D. Roosevelt finally fastened upon American life the heady
promise of the Wilsonian domestic and foreign program: permanent
partnership of Big Government, big business, and big unions; a
continuing and ever-expanding military-industrial complex; conscription;
continuing and accelerating inflation; and an endless and costly role as
counterrevolutionary “policeman” for the entire world. The
Roosevelt-Truman-Eisenhower-Kennedy-Johnson-Nixon-Ford-Carter world (and
there is little substantive difference among any of these
administrations) is “corporate liberalism,” the corporate State
fulfilled.

It is particularly ironic that conservatives, at least in rhetoric
supporters of a free-market economy, should be so complacent and even
admiring of our vast military-industrial complex. There is no greater
single distortion of the free market in present-day America. The bulk of
our scientists and engineers has been diverted from basic research for
civilian ends, from increasing productivity and the standard of living
of consumers, into wasteful, inefficient, and nonproductive military and
space boondoggles. These boondoggles are every bit as wasteful but
infinitely more destructive than the vast pyramid building of the
Pharaoh. It is no accident that Lord Keynes’s economics have proved to
be the economics par excellence of the corporate liberal State. For
Keynesian economists place equal approval upon all forms of government
spending, whether on pyramids, missiles, or steel plants; by definition
all of these expenditures swell the gross national product, regardless
of how wasteful they may be. It is only recently that many liberals have
begun to awaken to the evils of the waste, inflation, and militarism
that Keynesian corporate liberalism has brought to America.

As the scope of government spending—military and civilian alike—has
widened, science and industry have been skewed more and more into
unproductive goals and highly inefficient processes. The goal of
satisfying consumers as efficiently as possible has been increasingly
replaced by the currying of favors by government contractors, often in
the form of highly wasteful “cost-plus” contracts. Politics, in field
after field, has replaced economics in guiding the activities of
industry. Furthermore, as entire industries and regions of the country
have come to depend upon government and military contracts, a huge
vested interest has been created in continuing the programs, heedless of
whether they retain even the most threadbare excuse of military
necessity. Our economic prosperity has been made to depend on continuing
the narcotic of unproductive and antiproductive government
spending.^[10](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn10)^

One of the most perceptive and prophetic critics of America’s entry into
World War II was the classical liberal writer John T. Flynn. In his *As
We Go Marching*, written in the midst of the war he had tried so hard to
forestall, Flynn charged that the New Deal, culminating in its wartime
embodiment, had finally established the corporate State that important
elements of big business had been seeking since the turn of the
twentieth century. “The general idea,” Flynn wrote, was

> to reorder the society by making it a planned and coerced economy
> instead of a free one, in which business would be brought together
> into great guilds or an immense corporative structure, combining the
> elements of self rule and government supervision with a national
> economic policing system to enforce these decrees. ... This, after
> all, is not so very far from what business had been talking
> about.^[11](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn11)^

The New Deal had first attempted to create such a new society in the
National Recovery Administration and the Agricultural Adjustment
Administration, mighty engines of “regimentation” hailed by labor and
business alike. Now the advent of World War II had reestablished this
collectivist program—”an economy supported by great streams of debt
under complete control, with nearly all the planning agencies
functioning with almost totalitarian power under a vast bureaucracy.”
After the war, Flynn prophesied, the New Deal would attempt to expand
this system permanently into international affairs. He wisely predicted
that the great emphasis of vast governmental spending after the war
would continue to be military, since this is the one form of government
spending to which conservatives would never object, and which workers
would also welcome for its creation of jobs. “Thus militarism is the one
great glamorous public-works project upon which a variety of elements in
the community can be brought into
agreement.”^[12](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn12)^

Flynn predicted that America’s postwar policy would be
“internationalist” in the sense of being imperialist. Imperialism “is,
of course, international... in the sense that war is international,” and
it will follow from the policy of militarism. “We will do what other
countries have done; we will keep alive the fears of our people of the
aggressive ambitions of other countries and we will ourselves embark
upon imperialistic enterprises of our own.” Imperialism will ensure for
the United States the existence of perpetual “enemies,” of waging what
Charles A. Beard was later to call “perpetual war for perpetual peace.”
For, Flynn pointed out,

> we have managed to acquire bases all over the world. ... There is no
> part of the world where trouble can break out where... we cannot claim
> that our interests are menaced. Thus menaced, there must remain when
> the war is over a continuing argument in the hands of the imperialists
> for a vast naval establishment and a huge army ready to attack
> anywhere or to resist an attack from all the enemies we shall be
> obliged to have.^[13](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn13)^

One of the most moving portrayals of the change in American life wrought
by World War II was written by John Dos Passos, a lifelong radical and
individualist who was pushed from “extreme left” to “extreme right” by
the march of the New Deal. Dos Passos expressed his bitterness in his
postwar novel, *The Grand Design*:

> At home we organized bloodbanks and civilian defense and imitated the
> rest of the world by setting up concentration camps (only we called
> them relocation centers) and stuffing into them
>
> American citizens of Japanese ancestry... without benefit of *habeas
> corpus*. ...
>
> The President of the United States talked the sincere democrat and so
> did the members of Congress. In the Administration there were devout
> believers in civil liberty. “Now we’re busy fighting a war; we’ll
> deploy all four freedoms later on,” they said. ...
>
> War is a time of Caesars. ...
>
> And the American people were supposed to say thank you for the century
> of the Common Man turned over for relocation behind barbed wire so
> help him God.
>
> We learned. There are things we learned to do
>
> but we have not learned, in spite of the Constitution and the
> Declaration of Independence and the great debates at Richmond and
> Philadelphia
>
> how to put power over the lives of men into the hands of one man
>
> and to make him use it wisely.^[14](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn14)^

## SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY [soviet-foreign-policy]

In a previous chapter, we have already dealt with the problem of
national defense, abstracting from the question of whether the Russians
are *really* hell-bent upon a military attack upon the United States.
Since World War II, American military and foreign policy, at least
rhetorically, has been based upon the assumption of a looming threat of
Russian attack—an assumption that has managed to gain public approval
for global American intervention and for scores of billions in military
expenditures. But how realistic, how well grounded, *is* this
assumption?

First, there is no doubt that the Soviets, along with all other
Marxist-Leninists, would *like* to replace all existing social systems
by Communist regimes. But such a sentiment, of course, scarcely implies
any sort of realistic threat of attack—just as an ill wish in private
life can hardly be grounds for realistic expectation of imminent
aggression. On the contrary, Marxism-Leninism itself believes that a
victory of communism is inevitable—*not* on the wings of outside force,
but rather from accumulating tensions and “contradictions” within each
society. So Marxism-Leninism considers internal revolution (or, in the
current “Eurocommunist” version, democratic change) for installing
communism to be inevitable. At the same time, it holds any coercive
external imposition of communism to be at best suspect, and at worst
disruptive and counterproductive of genuine organic social change. Any
idea of “exporting” communism to other countries on the backs of the
Soviet military is totally contradictory to Marxist-Leninist theory.

We are not saying, of course, that Soviet leaders will never do anything
contrary to Marxist-Leninist theory. But to the extent that they act as
ordinary rulers of a strong Russian nation-state, the case for an
imminent Soviet threat to the United States is gravely weakened. For the
sole alleged basis of such a threat, as conjured up by our cold
warriors, is the Soviet Union’s alleged devotion to Marxist-Leninist
theory and to its ultimate goal of world Communist triumph. If the
Soviet rulers were simply to act as Russian dictators consulting only
their own nation-state interests, then the entire basis for treating the
Soviets as a uniquely diabolic source of imminent military assault
crumbles to the ground.

When the Bolsheviks took power in Russia in 1917, they had given little
thought to a future Soviet foreign policy, for they were convinced that
Communist revolution would soon follow in the advanced industrial
countries of Western Europe. When such hopes were dashed after the end
of World War I, Lenin and his fellow Bolsheviks adopted the theory of
“peaceful coexistence” as the basic foreign policy for a Communist
State. The idea was this: as the first successful Communist movement,
Soviet Russia would serve as a beacon for and supporter of other
Communist parties throughout the world. *But* the Soviet State *qua*
State would devote itself to peaceful relations with all other
countries, and would not attempt to export communism through inter-State
warfare. The idea here was not just to follow Marxist-Leninist theory,
but was the highly practical course of holding the survival of the
existing Communist State as the foremost goal of foreign policy: that
is, never to endanger the Soviet State by courting inter-State warfare.
Other countries would be expected to become Communist by their own
internal processes.

Thus, fortuitously, from a mixture of theoretical and practical grounds
of their own, the Soviets arrived early at what libertarians consider to
be the only proper and principled foreign policy. As time went on,
furthermore, this policy was reinforced by a “conservatism” that comes
upon all movements after they have acquired and retained power for any
length of time, in which the interests of keeping power over one’s
nation-state begins to take more and more precedence over the initial
ideal of world revolution. This increasing conservatism under Stalin and
his successors strengthened and reinforced the nonaggressive, “peaceful
coexistence” policy.

The Bolsheviks, indeed, began their success story by being literally the
only political party in Russia to clamor, from the beginning of World
War I, for an immediate Russian pullout from the war. Indeed, they went
further and courted enormous unpopularity among the public by calling
for the defeat of “their own” government (“revolutionary defeatism”).
When Russia began to suffer enormous losses, accompanied by massive
military desertions from the front, and the war became extremely
unpopular, the Bolsheviks, guided by Lenin, continued to be the only
party to call for an immediate end to the war—the other parties still
vowing to fight the Germans to the end. When the Bolsheviks took power,
Lenin, over the hysterical opposition of even the majority of the
Bolshevik central committee itself, insisted on concluding the
“appeasement” peace of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918. Here, Lenin
succeeded in taking Russia out of the war, even at the price of granting
to the victorious German army all the parts of the Russian empire which
it then occupied (including White Russia and the Ukraine). Thus, Lenin
and the Bolsheviks began their reign by being not simply a peace party,
but virtually a “peace-at-any-price” party.

After World War I and Germany’s defeat, the new Polish State attacked
Russia and succeeded in grabbing for itself a large chunk of White
Russia and the Ukraine. Taking advantage of the turmoil and of the civil
war within Russia at the end of the war, various other national
groups—Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—decided to break away
from the pre-World War I Russian empire and declare national
independence. Now, while Leninism pays lip service to national
self-determination, to Soviet rulers, from the very beginning, it was
clear that the boundaries of the old Russian State were supposed to
remain intact. The Red Army reconquered the Ukraine, not only from the
Whites, but also from the Ukrainian nationalists, and from the
indigenously Ukrainian anarchist army of Nestor Makhno as well. For the
rest, it was clear that Russia, like Germany in the 1920s and 1930s, was
a “revisionist” country vis à vis the postwar settlement at Versailles.
That is, the lodestar of both Russian and German foreign policy was to
recapture their pre-World War I borders—what they both considered the
“true” borders of their respective States. It should be noted that
*every* political party or tendency in Russia and Germany, whether
ruling the State or in opposition, agreed with this aim of full
restoration of national territory.

But, it should be emphasized, while Germany under Hitler took strong
measures to recapture the lost lands, the cautious and conservative
Soviet rulers did absolutely nothing. Only after the Stalin-Hitler pact
and the German conquest of Poland did the Soviets, now facing no danger
in doing so, recapture their lost territories. Specifically, the
Russians repossessed Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania as well as the old
Russian lands of White Russia and the Ukraine that had been eastern
Poland. And they were able to do so without a fight. The old pre-World
War I Russia had now been restored with the exception of Finland. But
Finland was prepared to fight. Here the Russians demanded not the
reincorporation of Finland as a whole, but only of parts of the Karelian
Isthmus which were ethnically Russian. When the Finns refused this
demand, the “Winter War” (1939–1940) between Russia and Finland ensued,
which ended with the Finns conceding only Russian
Karelia.^[15](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn15)^

On June 22, 1941, Germany, triumphant over everyone but England in the
West, launched a sudden, massive, and unprovoked assault on Soviet
Russia, an act of aggression aided and abetted by the other pro-German
States in Eastern Europe: Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, and
Finland. This German and allied invasion of Russia soon became one of
the pivotal facts in the history of Europe since that date. So
unprepared was Stalin for the assault, so trusting was he in the
rationality of the German-Russian accord for peace in Eastern Europe,
that he had allowed the Russian army to fall into disrepair. So
unwarlike was Stalin, in fact, that Germany was almost able to conquer
Russia in the face of enormous odds. Since Germany otherwise would have
been able to retain control of Europe indefinitely, it was Hitler who
was led by the siren call of anti-Communist ideology to throw away a
rational and prudent course and launch what was to be the beginning of
his ultimate defeat.

The mythology of the cold warriors often concedes that the Soviets were
not internationally aggressive *until* World War II—indeed, they are
compelled to assert this point, since most cold warriors heartily
approve the World War II alliance of the United States with Russia
against Germany. It was during and immediately after the war, they
assert, that Russia became expansionist and drove its way into Eastern
Europe.

What this charge overlooks is the central fact of the German and
associated assault upon Russia in June 1941. There is no doubt that
Germany and her allies launched this war. Hence, in order to defeat the
invaders, it was obviously necessary for the Russians to roll back the
invading armies and conquer Germany and the other warring countries of
Eastern Europe. It is easier to make a case for the United States being
expansionist for conquering and occupying Italy and part of Germany than
it is for Russia’s actions—after all, the United States was never
directly attacked by the Germans.

During World War II, the United States, Britain, and Russia, the three
major Allies, had agreed on joint three-power military occupation of all
the conquered territories. The United States was the first to break the
agreement during the war by allowing Russia no role whatever in the
military occupation of Italy. Despite this serious breach of agreement,
Stalin displayed his consistent preference for the conservative
interests of the Russian nation-state over cleaving to revolutionary
ideology by repeatedly betraying indigenous Communist movements. In
order to preserve peaceful relations between Russia and the West, Stalin
consistently tried to hold back the success of various Communist
movements. He was successful in France and Italy, where Communist
partisan groups might easily have seized power in the wake of the German
military retreat; but Stalin ordered them not to do so, and instead
persuaded them to join coalition regimes headed by anti-Communist
parties. In both countries, the Communists were soon ousted from the
coalition. In Greece, where the Communist partisans almost *did* seize
power, Stalin irretrievably weakened them by abandoning them and urging
them to turn over power to newly invading British troops.

In other countries, particularly ones where Communist partisan groups
were strong, the Communists flatly refused Stalin’s requests. In
Yugoslavia, the victorious Tito refused Stalin’s demand that Tito
subordinate himself to the anti-Communist Mihailovich in a governing
coalition; Mao refused a similar Stalin demand that he subordinate
himself to Chiang Kai-shek. There is no doubt that these rejections were
the beginning of the later extraordinarily important schisms within the
world Communist movement.

Russia, therefore, governed Eastern Europe as military occupier after
winning a war launched against her. Russia’s initial goal was not to
communize Eastern Europe on the backs of the Soviet army. Her goal was
to gain assurances that Eastern Europe would not be the broad highway
for an assault on Russia, as it had been three times in half a
century—the last time in a war in which over 20 million Russians had
been slaughtered. In short, Russia wanted countries on her border which
would not be anti-Communist in a military sense, and which would not be
used as a springboard for another invasion. Political conditions in
Eastern Europe were such that only in more modernized Finland did
non-Communist politicians exist whom Russia could trust to pursue a
peaceful line in foreign affairs. And in Finland, this situation was the
work of one far-seeing statesman, the agrarian leader Julio Paasikivi.
It was because Finland, then and since, has firmly followed the
“Paasikivi line” that Russia was willing to pull its troops out of
Finland and not to insist on the communization of that country—even
though it had fought two wars with Finland in the previous six years.

Even in the other Eastern European countries, Russia clung to coalition
governments for several years after the war and only fully communized
them in 1948—after three years of unrelenting American Cold War pressure
to try to oust Russia from these countries. In other areas, Russia
readily pulled its troops out of Austria and out of Azerbaijan.

The cold warriors find it difficult to explain Russian actions in
Finland. If Russia is always hell-bent to impose Communist rule wherever
it can, why the “soft line” on Finland? The only plausible explanation
is that its motivation is security for the Russian nation-state against
attack, with the success of world communism playing a very minor role in
its scale of priorities.

In fact, the cold warriors have never been able either to explain or
absorb the fact of deep schisms in the world Communist movement. For if
all Communists are governed by a common ideology, then every Communist
everywhere should be part of one unified monolith, and one which, given
the early success of the Bolsheviks, would make them subordinates or
“agents” of Moscow. If Communists are mainly motivated by their bond of
Marxism-Leninism, how come the deep China-Russia split, in which Russia,
for example, keeps one million troops at the ready on the China-Russia
frontier? How come the enmity between the Yugoslav and Albanian
Communist States? How come the actual military conflict between the
Cambodian and Vietnamese Communists? The answer, of course, is that once
a revolutionary movement seizes State power, it begins very quickly to
take on the attributes of a ruling class with a class interest in
retaining State power. The world revolution begins to pale, in their
outlook, to insignificance. And since State elites can and do have
conflicting interests in power and wealth, it is not surprising that
inter-Communist conflicts have become endemic.

Since their victory over German and associated military aggression in
World War II, the Soviets have continued to be conservative in their
military policy. Their only use of troops has been to *defend* their
territory in the Communist bloc, rather than to extend it further. Thus,
when Hungary threatened to leave the Soviet bloc in 1956, or
Czechoslovakia in 1968, the Soviets intervened with
troops—reprehensibly, to be sure, but still acting in a conservative and
defensive rather than expansionist manner. (The Soviets apparently gave
considerable thought to invading Yugoslavia when Tito took it out of the
Soviet bloc, but were deterred by the formidable qualities for guerrilla
fighting of the Yugoslav army.) In no case has Russia used troops to
extend its bloc or to conquer more territories.

Professor Stephen F. Cohen, director of the program in Russian Studies
at Princeton, has recently delineated the nature of Soviet conservatism
in foreign affairs:

> That a system born in revolution and still professing revolutionary
> ideas should have become one of the most conservative in the world may
> seem preposterous. But all those factors variously said to be most
> important in Soviet politics have contributed to this conservatism:
> the bureaucratic tradition of Russian government before the
> revolution; the subsequent bureaucratization of Soviet life, which
> proliferated conservative norms and created an entrenched class of
> zealous defenders of bureaucratic privilege; the geriatric nature of
> the present-day elite; and even the official ideology, whose thrust
> turned many years ago from the creation of a new social order to
> extolling the existing one. ...
>
> In other words, the main thrust of Soviet conservatism today is to
> preserve what it already has at home and abroad, not to jeopardize it.
> A conservative government is, of course, capable of dangerous
> militaristic actions, as we saw in Czechoslovakia... but these are
> acts of imperial protectionism, a kind of defensive militarism, not a
> revolutionary or aggrandizing one. It is certainly true that for most
> Soviet leaders, as presumably for most American leaders, detente is
> not an altruistic endeavor but the pursuit of national interests. In
> one sense, this is sad. But it is probably also true that mutual
> self-interest provides a more durable basis for detente than lofty,
> and finally empty, altruism.^[16](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn16)^

Similarly, as impeccable an anti-Soviet source as former CIA Director
William Colby finds the overwhelming concern of the Soviets to be the
defensive goal of avoiding another catastrophic invasion of their
territory. As Colby testified before the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee:

> You will find a concern, even a paranoia, over their \[the Soviets’\]
> own security. You will find the determination that they shall never
> again be invaded and put through the kinds of turmoil that they have
> been under and many different invasions. ... I think that they... want
> to overprotect themselves to make certain that that does not
> happen.^[17](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn17)^

Even the Chinese, for all their bluster, have pursued a conservative and
pacific foreign policy. Not only have they failed to invade Taiwan,
recognized internationally as part of China, but they have even allowed
the small offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu to remain in Chiang
Kai-shek’s hands. No moves have been made against the British and
Portuguese-occupied enclaves of Hong Kong and Macao. And China even took
the unusual step of declaring a *unilateral* cease-fire and withdrawal
of forces to its border after having triumphed easily over Indian arms
in their escalated border war.^[18](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn18)^

## AVOIDING *A PRIORI* HISTORY [avoiding-a-priori-history]

There is still one thesis common to Americans and even to some
libertarians that may prevent them from absorbing the analysis of this
chapter: the myth propounded by Woodrow Wilson that democracies must
inevitably be peace-loving while dictatorships are inevitably warlike.
This thesis was of course highly convenient for covering Wilson’s own
culpability for dragging America into a needless and monstrous war. But
apart from that, there is simply no evidence for this assumption. Many
dictatorships have turned inward, cautiously confining themselves to
preying on their own people: examples range from premodern Japan to
Communist Albania to innumerable dictatorships in the Third World today.
Uganda’s Idi Amin, perhaps the most brutal and repressive dictator in
today’s world, shows no signs whatever of jeopardizing his regime by
invading neighboring countries. On the other hand, such an indubitable
democracy as Great Britain spread its coercive imperialism across the
globe during the nineteenth and earlier centuries.

The theoretical reason why focussing on democracy or dictatorship misses
the point is that *States*—*all* States—rule their population and decide
whether or not to make war. And *all* States, whether formally a
democracy or dictatorship or some other brand of rule, are run by a
ruling elite. Whether or not these elites, in any particular case, will
make war upon another State is a function of a complex interweaving web
of causes, including temperament of the rulers, the strength of their
enemies, the inducements for war, public opinion. While public opinion
has to be gauged in either case, the only real difference between a
democracy and a dictatorship on making war is that in the former *more*
propaganda must be beamed at one’s subjects to engineer their approval.
Intensive propaganda is necessary in any case—as we can see by the
zealous opinion-moulding behavior of all modern warring States. But the
democratic State must work harder and faster. And also the democratic
State must be more hypocritical in using rhetoric designed to appeal to
the values of the masses: justice, freedom, national interest,
patriotism, world peace, etc. So in democratic States, the art of
propagandizing their subjects must be a bit more sophisticated and
refined. But this, as we have seen, is true of *all* governmental
decisions, not just war or peace. For all governments—but especially
democratic governments—must work hard at persuading their subjects that
all of their deeds of oppression are *really* in their subjects’ best
interests.

What we have said about democracy and dictatorship applies equally to
the lack of correlation between degrees of internal freedom in a country
and its external aggressiveness. Some States have proved themselves
perfectly capable of allowing a considerable degree of freedom
internally while making aggressive war abroad; other States have shown
themselves capable of totalitarian rule internally while pursuing a
pacific foreign policy. The examples of Uganda, Albania, China, Great
Britain, etc., apply equally well in this comparison.

In short, libertarians and other Americans must guard against *a priori*
history: in this case, against the assumption that, in any conflict, the
State which is more democratic or allows more internal freedom is
necessarily or even presumptively the victim of aggression by the more
dictatorial or totalitarian State. There is simply no historical
evidence whatever for such a presumption. In deciding on relative rights
and wrongs, on relative degrees of aggression in any dispute in foreign
affairs, there is no substitute for a detailed empirical, historical
investigation of the dispute itself. It should occasion no great
surprise, then, if such an investigation concludes that a democratic and
relatively far freer United States has been more aggressive and
imperialistic in foreign affairs than a relatively totalitarian Russia
or China. Conversely, hailing a State for being less aggressive in
foreign affairs in no way implies that the observer is an any way
sympathetic to that State’s internal record. It is vital—indeed, it is
literally a life-and-death matter—that Americans be able to look as
coolly and clear-sightedly, as free from myth at their government’s
record in foreign affairs as they are increasingly able to do in
domestic politics. For war and a phony “external threat” have long been
the chief means by which the State wins back the loyalty of its
subjects. As we have seen, war and militarism were the gravediggers of
classical liberalism; we must not allow the State to get away with this
ruse ever again.^[19](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn19)^

## A FOREIGN POLICY PROGRAM [a-foreign-policy-program]

To conclude our discussion, the primary plank of a libertarian foreign
policy program for America must be to call upon the United States to
abandon its policy of global interventionism: to withdraw immediately
and completely, militarily and politically, from Asia, Europe, Latin
America, the Middle East, from *everywhere*. The cry among American
libertarians should be for the United States to withdraw now, in every
way that involves the U.S. government. The United States should
dismantle its bases, withdraw its troops, stop its incessant political
meddling, and abolish the CIA. It should also end all foreign aid—which
is simply a device to coerce the American taxpayer into subsidizing
American exports and favored foreign States, all in the name of “helping
the starving peoples of the world.” In short, the United States
government should withdraw totally to within its own boundaries and
maintain a policy of strict political “isolation” or neutrality
everywhere.

The spirit of this ultra-”isolationist,” libertarian foreign policy was
expressed during the 1930s by retired Marine Corps Major General Smedley
D. Butler. In the fall of 1936, General Butler proposed a now-forgotten
constitutional amendment, an amendment which would delight libertarian
hearts if it were once again to be taken seriously. Here is Butler’s
proposed constitutional amendment in its entirety:

> 1. The removal of members of the land armed forces from within the
> continental limits of the United States and the Panama Canal Zone for
> any cause whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
>
> 2. The vessels of the United States Navy, or of the other branches of
> the armed service, are hereby prohibited from steaming, for any reason
> whatsoever except on an errand of mercy, more than five hundred miles
> from our coast.
>
> 3. Aircraft of the Army, Navy and Marine Corps is hereby prohibited
> from flying, for any reason whatsoever, more than seven hundred and
> fifty miles beyond the coast of the United
> States.^[20](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn20)^

## DISARMAMENT [disarmament]

Strict isolationism and neutrality, then, is the first plank of a
libertarian foreign policy, in addition to recognizing the chief
responsibility of the American State for the Cold War and for its entry
into all the other conflicts of this century. Given isolation, however,
what sort of arms policy should the United States pursue? Many of the
original isolationists also advocated a policy of “arming to the teeth”;
but such a program, in a nuclear age, continues the grave risk of global
holocaust, a mightily armed State, and the enormous waste and
distortions that unproductive government spending imposes on the
economy.

Even from a purely military point of view, the United States and the
Soviet Union have the power to annihilate each other many times over;
and the United States could easily preserve all of its nuclear
retaliatory power by scrapping every armament except Polaris submarines
which are invulnerable and armed with nuclear missiles with
multi-targeted warheads. Bur for the libertarian, or indeed for anyone
worried about massive nuclear destruction of human life, even disarming
down to Polaris submarines is hardly a satisfactory settlement. World
peace would continue to rest on a shaky “balance of terror,” a balance
that could always be upset by accident or by the actions of madmen in
power. No; for anyone to become secure from the nuclear menace it is
vital to achieve worldwide nuclear disarmament, a disarmament toward
which the SALT agreement of 1972 and the SALT II negotiations are only a
very hesitant beginning.

Since it is in the interest of all people, and even of all State rulers,
*not* to be annihilated in a nuclear holocaust, this mutual
self-interest provides a firm, rational basis for agreeing upon and
carrying out a policy of joint and worldwide “general and complete
disarmament” of nuclear and other modern weapons of mass destruction.
Such joint disarmament has been feasible ever since the Soviet Union
accepted Western proposals to this effect on May 10, 1955—an acceptance
which only gained a total and panicky Western abandonment of their own
proposals!^[21](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn21)^

The American version has long held that while we have wanted disarmament
plus inspection, the Soviets persist in wanting only disarmament without
inspection. The actual picture is very different: since May 1955, the
Soviet Union has favored any and all disarmament and unlimited
inspection of whatever has been disarmed; whereas the Americans have
advocated unlimited inspection but accompanied by little or no
disarmament! This was the burden of President Eisenhower’s spectacular
but basically dishonest “open skies” proposal, which replaced the
disarmament proposals we quickly withdrew after the Soviet acceptance of
May 1955. Even now that open skies have been essentially achieved
through American and Russian space satellites, the 1972 controversial
SALT agreement involves no actual disarmament, only limitations on
further nuclear expansion. Furthermore, since American strategic might
throughout the world rests on nuclear and air power, there is good
reason to believe in Soviet sincerity in any agreement to liquidate
nuclear missiles or offensive bombers.

Not only should there be joint disarmament of nuclear weapons, but also
of all weapons capable of being fired massively across national borders;
in particular bombers. It is precisely such weapons of mass destruction
as the missile and the bomber which can never be pinpoint-targeted to
avoid their use against innocent civilians. In addition, the total
abandonment of missiles and bombers would *enforce* upon every
government, especially including the American, a policy of isolation and
neutrality. Only if governments are deprived of weapons of offensive
warfare will they be forced to pursue a policy of isolation and peace.
Surely, in view of the black record of all governments, including the
American, it would be folly to leave these harbingers of mass murder and
destruction in their hands, and to trust them never to employ those
monstrous weapons. If it is illegitimate for government ever to employ
such weapons, why should they be allowed to remain, fully loaded, in
their none-too-clean hands?

The contrast between the conservative and the libertarian positions on
war and American foreign policy was starkly expressed in an interchange
between William F. Buckley, Jr., and the libertarian Ronald Hamowy in
the early days of the contemporary libertarian movement. Scorning the
libertarian critique of conservative foreign policy postures, Buckley
wrote:

> There is room in any society for those whose only concern is for
> tablet-keeping; but let them realize that it is only because of the
> conservatives’ disposition to sacrifice in order to withstand the
> \[Soviet\] enemy, that they are able to enjoy their monasticism, and
> pursue their busy little seminars on whether or not to demunicipalize
> the garbage collectors.

To which Hamowy trenchantly replied:

> It might appear ungrateful of me, but I must decline to thank Mr.
> Buckley for saving my life. It is, further, my belief that if his
> viewpoint prevails and that if he persists in his unsolicited aid the
> result will almost certainly be my death (and that of tens of millions
> of others) in nuclear war or my imminent imprisonment as an
> “un-American”....
>
> I hold strongly to my personal liberty and it is precisely because of
> this that I insist that no one has the right to force his decisions on
> another. Mr. Buckley chooses to be dead rather than Red. So do I. But
> I insist that all men be allowed to make that decision for themselves.
> A nuclear holocaust will make it for
> them.^[22](#24-notes.html#chap14_fn22)^

To which we might add that anyone who wishes is entitled to make the
personal decision of “better dead than Red” or “give me liberty or give
me death.” What he is *not* entitled to do is to make these decisions
*for* others, as the prowar policy of conservatism would do. What
conservatives are really saying is: “Better *them* dead than Red,” and
“give me liberty or give *them* death”—which are the battle cries not of
noble heroes but of mass murderers.

In one sense alone is Mr. Buckley correct: in the nuclear age it *is*
more important to worry about war and foreign policy than about
demunicipalizing garbage disposal, as important as the latter may be.
But if we do so, we come ineluctably to the reverse of the Buckleyite
conclusion. We come to the view that since modern air and missile
weapons *cannot* be pinpoint-targeted to avoid harming civilians, their
very existence must be condemned. And nuclear and air disarmament
becomes a great and overriding good to be pursued for its own sake, more
avidly even than the demunicipalization of garbage.

